[Amit Varma]: Imagine if COVID-19 had hit the world a few centuries before it actually did.
[Amit Varma]: Before we knew what a virus was, or an ACE2 receptor was, or what natural selection was.
[Amit Varma]: A time when we couldn't treat any disease because we couldn't understand any disease.
[Amit Varma]: A time when people considered themselves lucky to live till 30.
[Amit Varma]: A time without ventilators or paracetamols.
[Amit Varma]: As it happens, imagining that isn't all that hard because we've seen that picture.
[Amit Varma]: The world has been struck by various pandemics in the past, and the accounts are horrific.
[Amit Varma]: Chinmay Tumbe mentioned them in his fine book, Age of Pandemics, which I discussed with him
[Amit Varma]: in an earlier episode.
[Amit Varma]: Writing about the plague in the 6th century, Chinmay wrote,
[Amit Varma]: The demographic devastation in the Mediterranean world was stark, with records in multiple
[Amit Varma]: languages describing how thousands of people died in a single day, or how, as per one traveler,
[Amit Varma]: corpses were lying in the fields and along the roadside and cattle wandering untended
[Amit Varma]: into the hills.
[Amit Varma]: The historian Procopius described how the bodies came so fast that those digging the
[Amit Varma]: trenches to bury them could not dig fast enough.
[Amit Varma]: What to do with the bodies?
[Amit Varma]: They climbed the towers of the fortifications where they were tore of the roofs and just
[Amit Varma]: piled in the bodies from there.
[Amit Varma]: When plague struck again in the 14th century, in what is known as the infamous Black Death,
[Amit Varma]: up to 50 million people are estimated to have died.
[Amit Varma]: That included 35-60% of Europe.
[Amit Varma]: Imagine that.
[Amit Varma]: Half the people around you just gone.
[Amit Varma]: As if it's the infinity wars.
[Amit Varma]: Well, you're listening to this episode in the middle of the second wave in India, and
[Amit Varma]: the world has been fighting COVID-19 for a year and still not won.
[Amit Varma]: And yet it could have been far worse.
[Amit Varma]: Here's the thing, our politicians have failed us, our bureaucrats have failed us, policy
[Amit Varma]: makers have failed us, the dysfunctional state stands exposed for what it is.
[Amit Varma]: And in so many different ways, we have failed each other.
[Amit Varma]: But science has not failed us this time.
[Amit Varma]: Unlike in pandemics of past times, we know what is happening.
[Amit Varma]: We know what we do not know about it.
[Amit Varma]: And we have made miraculous progress in coming up with the vaccines that we have.
[Amit Varma]: Is it enough?
[Amit Varma]: Of course not.
[Amit Varma]: As my guest on today's show says, vaccines aren't enough, you need vaccinations.
[Amit Varma]: If I may add to that, human knowledge is not enough.
[Amit Varma]: You need human action.
[Amit Varma]: There is a lot that is wrong with the world today.
[Amit Varma]: But there is also a lot that can give us hope.
[Amit Varma]: Science can give us hope.
[Unknown]: Welcome to the seen and the unseen.
[Unknown]: Our weekly podcast on economics, politics, and behavioral science.
[Amit Varma]: Please welcome your host, Amit Bhaluman.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome to the seen and the unseen.
[Amit Varma]: My guest for today is Anirban Mahapatra, a scientist, science writer, and editor who's
[Amit Varma]: just written a wonderful book called COVID-19, separating fact from fiction.
[Amit Varma]: I first discovered Anirban on Twitter during this pandemic.
[Amit Varma]: He tweets at the handle of at Bhalumanush and was one of the voices of reason during
[Amit Varma]: the last few months.
[Amit Varma]: His book is much needed because it explains a complex subject in simple language from
[Amit Varma]: first principles.
[Amit Varma]: For a layperson like me, it was a perfect way to go deep into the subject without having
[Amit Varma]: the sense that I had to work for it.
[Amit Varma]: Anirban explains science so well that at moments, I felt like a child again, discovering new
[Amit Varma]: and wonderful things in wide-eyed wonder.
[Amit Varma]: Now, this episode is actually like two episodes in one.
[Amit Varma]: In the first half, we speak of Anirban's journey in the state of modern science and
[Amit Varma]: academics and science writing and so on.
[Amit Varma]: In the second half, we speak about COVID-19 itself, what the virus is, what it does, and
[Amit Varma]: the different ways in which science is fighting it.
[Amit Varma]: I love both halves of this conversation and I hope you do as well.
[Amit Varma]: A quick note before we start, the day after I recorded this conversation, my father died
[Amit Varma]: of COVID-19.
[Amit Varma]: He'd been admitted to hospital for other issues a couple of weeks before that and was
[Amit Varma]: fading in different ways.
[Amit Varma]: He couldn't recognize me when I last met him.
[Amit Varma]: He picked up COVID at the hospital and spent a few days in a COVID ICU.
[Amit Varma]: We weren't allowed to meet him, obviously, but we were allowed one video call a day.
[Amit Varma]: In those calls, he was unable to speak and we don't even know if he was in his senses.
[Amit Varma]: And if he wasn't, that could have been a blessing because he was clearly in a lot of suffering.
[Amit Varma]: To be honest, I haven't processed this yet.
[Amit Varma]: It leads to bigger questions that no one can have an answer for.
[Amit Varma]: As Wittgenstein said, quote, what we cannot speak about, we must pass over in silence.
[Amit Varma]: Stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: For everything else, though, there is science and rationality and those are what this episode
[Amit Varma]: celebrates.
[Amit Varma]: Before we get to this conversation, though, let's take a quick commercial break.
[Amit Varma]: On the scene and the unseen, I often speak about positive some games.
[Amit Varma]: Well, if you want to be surrounded by beauty and you love fine art, I have a win-win proposition
[Amit Varma]: for you.
[Amit Varma]: Head on over to IndianColors.com.
[Amit Varma]: Indian Colors licenses images of fine art from some of the best contemporary artists
[Amit Varma]: in India and adapts them to objects of everyday use like tote bags, pouches and home decor
[Amit Varma]: items.
[Amit Varma]: You get to surround yourself with the finest modern Indian art at affordable prices and
[Amit Varma]: artists get royalties for every product you buy.
[Amit Varma]: Win-win game.
[Amit Varma]: The Indian Colors new range is in and includes elegant yet comfortable dresses for women
[Amit Varma]: and casual shirts for men with standout motifs by artists such as Tanmoy Samanta, Manisha
[Amit Varma]: Ghera Baswari, Shruti Nelson, Pradeep Mishra and Jaideep Mehrotra.
[Amit Varma]: Stay home but dress smart.
[Amit Varma]: And if you're missing your friends in these lockdown days, worry not.
[Amit Varma]: You can show them you're thinking of them by buying gifts for them from Indian Colors.
[Amit Varma]: Corporate gifting is also available.
[Amit Varma]: So head on over to IndianColors.com, that's Colors with an OU, and make art a part of
[Amit Varma]: your life.
[Amit Varma]: And hey, for a 15% discount, use the code UNSEEN.
[Amit Varma]: That's right.
[Amit Varma]: UNSEEN for 15% off at IndianColors.com.
[Amit Varma]: Anirban, welcome to the Scene and the Unseen.
[Amit Varma]: Hi, thank you for having me today.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, you know, the last few months, of course, have been very tough for the world, very tough
[Amit Varma]: for all of us.
[Amit Varma]: If one is to look for silver linings, I think one of my silver linings is that I discovered
[Amit Varma]: your work on Twitter.
[Amit Varma]: I had no idea of anyone called Ad Bhalo Manoosh before, you know, COVID kind of stuck and
[Amit Varma]: you obviously very quickly became one of the soundest sources on what's really going on
[Amit Varma]: during this period of time.
[Amit Varma]: So now, you know, because I hardly know you at all, I just know you from your very scientific
[Amit Varma]: crisp factual tweets, I want to get to know a little more.
[Amit Varma]: So tell me, tell me, you know, a bit about your childhood, where did you grow up?
[Guest]: What was that like?
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: Okay, so where to start?
[Guest]: I was, my parents were both physicians.
[Guest]: I say were because my father passed away six years ago.
[Guest]: And my father came from a very small village at the Bengal-Odisha border, and when we say
[Guest]: to our children that we had to walk in the snow or so far to actually get to a school,
[Guest]: in my father's case, he did have to walk from his village to get to his school.
[Guest]: And from there, from that remote village where there was no electricity, there was no running
[Guest]: water, he went to medical college, and then from there to he did his post graduation,
[Guest]: he did his MD from Chandigarh, and then his DM from Ames.
[Guest]: My mother went to Calcutta Medical College.
[Guest]: And she from there, she also went to Ames, and they were both doctors there.
[Guest]: So I was born at Ames in New Delhi.
[Guest]: And after that, my father was in the United States by both my parents were in the US for
[Guest]: some time.
[Guest]: So I went to school there for a little bit, and I came back to India.
[Guest]: And then my formative years were actually mostly in India.
[Guest]: So I when I came back to India, I learned to read and write in Bangla, I learned to
[Guest]: play cricket at a much later age than a lot of other people.
[Guest]: And I went through school and then both my parents were like, okay, so we're doctors,
[Guest]: it's basically almost inevitable that you will have to be a physician.
[Guest]: But I figured out a little bit later on when I was with my father and sometimes even at
[Guest]: night because he when he moved back, he moved back to a small tertiary district town and
[Guest]: there weren't that many was a US trained board certified cardiologist and there weren't that
[Guest]: many physicians there at that time.
[Guest]: And so in the middle of the night, sometimes I would have to go with him with the ECG machine
[Guest]: and help him with that.
[Guest]: And I realized at that time that I was more into the research side of it, I wasn't going
[Guest]: to be a very good clinician, I just did not have that in me.
[Guest]: And the other thing I realized is I really loved biology.
[Guest]: And one of the things is that if you look into any life form on the planet right now,
[Guest]: because it's had 4 billion years of evolution, there are some remarkable things about it,
[Guest]: we just have to keep looking and be curious about it.
[Guest]: So I did my bachelor's degree and my master's degree in India.
[Guest]: And I got a very nice fellowship, a university fellowship to study microbiology at the Ohio
[Guest]: State University in the US.
[Guest]: And I came over to the US.
[Guest]: And I remember one of the first courses I took in the US.
[Guest]: And I absolutely bombed it.
[Guest]: And that's because I didn't know how to learn anything.
[Guest]: I had gone through the Indian system of basically picking up a lot of facts and trying to crack
[Guest]: exams.
[Guest]: And so when I was taking this course, this was in the first semester, first quarter of
[Guest]: my PhD, and the professors, each professor was coming in, and they would just be presenting
[Guest]: a few papers of research relevant to their own work.
[Guest]: I picked up all the facts in those papers.
[Guest]: But when the exam actually came, they didn't ask any other facts, they wanted me to synthesize
[Guest]: what was in those papers to be able to come up with completely independent and open-ended
[Guest]: answers to questions that they had that were tangentially related to those papers.
[Guest]: And I really did poorly in that first exam.
[Guest]: But after that, I figured out that this is how I was, and this is what I was thinking
[Guest]: all along is that I was always sort of a rebellious person who asked like, the how and the why.
[Guest]: And this and so then I took like a duck to water after that.
[Guest]: And I did better after that, I was very fortunate to be able to get into a lab at the time that
[Guest]: they were doing really groundbreaking work.
[Guest]: So the lab that I joined at Ohio State University, to do my PhD, they had at that time discovered
[Guest]: a new amino acid.
[Guest]: So typically, as as most even high school students will be able to tell you, folks who
[Guest]: take biology that there are 20 amino acids that are inserted into proteins, and these
[Guest]: are coded in the genetic code.
[Guest]: There are a few cases of a 21st amino acid, which had been discovered in 1986.
[Guest]: When I joined the lab in 2001, the lab I joined, they had to back to back, well, they had two
[Guest]: science papers demonstrating the genetic encoding of the 22nd amino acid pyrolysine.
[Guest]: And this was basically something that went into the textbooks, and it was discovered
[Guest]: as being equivalent of discovering a new particle in physics.
[Guest]: And that sort of appealed to me.
[Guest]: And that has sort of been my driving interest in science, is that it is not static.
[Guest]: All along, we have been reading these textbooks that everything is as it has been, nothing
[Guest]: ever changes in science, the textbooks, the editions get updated, and we just memorize
[Guest]: those facts.
[Guest]: But there was a great time to be in that lab.
[Guest]: And I joined that lab, I had some very amazing friends that I worked with in that lab, got
[Guest]: a really great and challenging project.
[Guest]: And the first paper, when we were getting it done, it was basically elucidating the
[Guest]: process by which that amino acid gets inserted into specific proteins.
[Guest]: And we did all the experiments, we knew there was another group working on it as well.
[Guest]: And we sent it into science as well, because the earlier papers had been in science.
[Guest]: And they rejected the paper.
[Guest]: They said, they gave us a very short amount of time and said the paper is, it looks good,
[Guest]: but it's basically they sent us a standard of form rejection letter.
[Guest]: And so we send it around in nature, we're saying we're not going to try anywhere else,
[Guest]: we have confidence in our work, we're going to stay up to the high standard of the work
[Guest]: that we've done.
[Guest]: And fortunately, they asked us to do a little bit more, we did a few additional experiments,
[Guest]: but nature published it.
[Guest]: And the funny thing is after when nature published that paper, science did a write up on that
[Guest]: same paper that we had published.
[Guest]: So that was a really great opportunity for me.
[Guest]: And that discovery that we made has some real world applications as well.
[Guest]: Scientists are using it, using that system as a tool to insert new amino acids with different
[Guest]: structure and function as building blocks to increase the functional capability of different
[Guest]: proteins right now.
[Guest]: And so after that, I had a few more really good papers.
[Guest]: And then when the time came around to complete my PhD, I was like, okay, I'm going to go
[Guest]: the traditional route, I'm going to be a scientist.
[Guest]: And I had a couple of very nice postdoc interviews done, I was ready to do a postdoc.
[Guest]: And then all of a sudden, I saw this, this job ad for an assistant managing editor position
[Guest]: for a newish scientific journal in the field of chemical biology, which is using the tools
[Guest]: of chemistry and biochemistry to solve important problems in biology.
[Guest]: And I looked at the job ad and it said, okay, at that time, it was like, I would be looking
[Guest]: at all the manuscripts that would be coming into the journal, working with the scientific
[Guest]: editors and deciding whether those manuscripts should go out to peer review, I would be writing
[Guest]: summaries of papers, I would be going to meetings and commissioning work.
[Guest]: And then we were also doing podcasts at that time, interviews with authors in the, well,
[Guest]: I say we, so what happened is I ultimately did apply for it.
[Guest]: And I did get the job and I joined there, that's a little over a decade ago.
[Guest]: And that was a very thrilling and intellectually rewarding experience for me there.
[Guest]: As I started on working on a newish journal, a journal that is now fairly well known and
[Guest]: established and working with editors who were scientifically amazing and at the top of their
[Guest]: individual disciplines, but were also very, very kind to this kid who had just come out
[Guest]: of a lab and basically heard him out.
[Guest]: So I do consider them my mentors.
[Guest]: And so at that time I was working with some of my editors were Laura Kiesling, who's at
[Guest]: MIT and is one of the leaders in chemical biology.
[Guest]: Jennifer Doudna was one of the editors I worked with at that time, and she won the Nobel prize
[Guest]: last year for her CRISPR-Cas system.
[Guest]: She hadn't discovered CRISPR-Cas when I had joined.
[Guest]: So I was actually, I know the history of that discovery and how that has moved on for genome
[Guest]: editing and the potential that that definitely has.
[Guest]: And so when I was working on that one journal, I got involved in launching other journals.
[Guest]: And the way that came about is like, basically my organization said, you have all these ideas
[Guest]: and we're looking to expand into new areas of science.
[Guest]: Tell us about some of these ideas.
[Guest]: And my first idea was we are looking at like multidisciplinary areas where we can bring
[Guest]: together different scientists from different fields.
[Guest]: And neuroscience is definitely one of the next frontiers.
[Guest]: And so I, a little over a decade ago now, I helped propose, write up and launch a neuroscience
[Guest]: journal that brought in some of the biology and the chemistry.
[Guest]: And incidentally, I want to mention this because we were talking about COVID-19.
[Guest]: One of the first descriptions or one of the first ideas of the loss of smell after COVID-19
[Guest]: was proposed by a couple of scientists based out of Pakistan who had written this perspective
[Guest]: in a journal that I had launched.
[Guest]: So I was very, very thrilled by that.
[Guest]: And this happened early on, I think around February or March of 2020.
[Guest]: And so after that, I haven't looked back.
[Guest]: I have been involved in launching other journals as well.
[Guest]: I've launched a synthetic biology journal.
[Guest]: So synthetic biology is basically using the tools and techniques of, of engineering to
[Guest]: biology and using cells as factories to produce products.
[Guest]: So it's the, it's the next step of biotechnology.
[Guest]: So I would say it's biotechnology 2.0 or 3.0.
[Guest]: And so I helped launch that journal.
[Guest]: I launched an infectious diseases journal.
[Guest]: This was before the pandemic.
[Guest]: And then I've moved on to other areas now where the portfolio of journals that I work
[Guest]: with include climate change, sustainable chemistry, energy, and material science, physical chemistry,
[Guest]: photonics.
[Guest]: So I've moved.
[Guest]: So one of the reasons I left the bench is because I was sort of very, very skilled and
[Guest]: I knew a lot about one very specific area of science and I wanted to become more of
[Guest]: a generalist.
[Guest]: And I think that that happened over, over time.
[Guest]: As you mentioned, most people on Twitter don't know anything, any of this, because I kept
[Guest]: us very, very low profile and I didn't mix what I did at work with my tweets, which were
[Guest]: sometimes just philosophical musings and sometimes my travel and, and, and my experiments and
[Guest]: failed experiments in the kitchen.
[Amit Varma]: Wow.
[Amit Varma]: So there is so much to unpack there and so many strands and thank God I have a notebook.
[Amit Varma]: So I'm kind of taking notes of all the things I want to talk about.
[Amit Varma]: But the first thing that kind of intrigued me was the love for biology, because I don't
[Amit Varma]: come across too many people who say that they love biology as a kid.
[Amit Varma]: And this is obviously a function of the way that it's taught to us and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: And perhaps, you know, your parents being doctors might have helped and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, one of my sort of big complaints about our education system, not just here,
[Amit Varma]: but I think kind of everywhere is that, you know, many of the things we are taught, in
[Amit Varma]: fact, everything we are taught is potentially full of wonder.
[Amit Varma]: Like I think about this most in the context of mathematics, that it's taught in such boring,
[Amit Varma]: dull ways and people just turn away from it.
[Amit Varma]: But actually, it's like so integral to our lives and explain so much and it's not even,
[Amit Varma]: you know, difficult.
[Amit Varma]: And I can see sort of a similar process with biology and I was sort of intrigued when you
[Amit Varma]: said that when you kind of took the first exam and that you as because you were in that
[Amit Varma]: rote learning kind of frame of mind, it didn't quite work out.
[Amit Varma]: Some sort of wondering that, you know, this whole way of thinking like, like these days,
[Amit Varma]: whenever I learn something new, I just first try to go back to first principles.
[Amit Varma]: So in the sense, don't tell me the right way of doing anything, don't tell me the process
[Amit Varma]: by which one does something, I want to go back to first principles, think of it from
[Amit Varma]: there.
[Amit Varma]: And then I can work a lot of the stuff out.
[Amit Varma]: And then whatever I subsequently learn is kind of easy to understand.
[Amit Varma]: And it also strikes me that when I meet other people with this kind of approach, it strikes
[Amit Varma]: me that you can apply it to everything, right?
[Amit Varma]: And you've kind of spoken about how, you know, you begin in biology, but then you kind of
[Amit Varma]: spread out like this, you spoke about synthetic biology, where you're applying the principles
[Amit Varma]: of engineering to biology, which is fascinating to me, and you're bringing this other prism.
[Amit Varma]: And it seems to me that there is, you know, a certain kind of person who does this, who'll,
[Amit Varma]: you know, look at the first principles of everything, who'll, you know, and therefore
[Amit Varma]: for them, it's easy not to get trapped in the conventions of a particular field, but
[Amit Varma]: to go beyond and to, you know, apply other prisms, apply other methods, and it kind of
[Amit Varma]: broadens your thinking.
[Amit Varma]: And it also strikes me that many people, even many accomplished people sort of get trapped
[Amit Varma]: by the conventions of their sort of field.
[Amit Varma]: So now that you've taken this interesting journey, whereby the nature of your work starting
[Amit Varma]: journals in all these different fields, you are constantly one interacting with all of
[Amit Varma]: these people, and to also sort of expanding your own knowledge and all of that, what sort
[Amit Varma]: of your sense of the ecosystem out there, like, are there many thinkers like you or
[Amit Varma]: is it kind of an exception?
[Amit Varma]: Do you wish there were more people who took a broader view of the science and at the same
[Amit Varma]: time, a deeper view than, you know, might be the case?
[Amit Varma]: Because I certainly see that, you know, in fields that I know a little bit about, like
[Amit Varma]: economics or whatever, that there will be people who are, you know, extremely accomplished,
[Amit Varma]: but they're almost functioning within the bounds of what they have learned in an academic
[Amit Varma]: sense.
[Amit Varma]: And they're not just looking at the world around them and, you know, applying those
[Amit Varma]: principles to everything or taking insight from, you know, other methods.
[Guest]: I think there are a lot of people who think like this, and I fervently believe that all
[Guest]: children grow up like this, that when they are very young, maybe before they have it
[Guest]: beaten out of them in school by teachers who say that this is the way that you have to
[Guest]: do something, or do you know more than me, or you have to get good marks in an exam.
[Guest]: I think even, and I really enjoy interacting with very young children.
[Guest]: They ask some of the best questions, they do not have the same language.
[Guest]: So you have to start from what you said, first principles, you cannot assume that they will
[Guest]: understand the jargon.
[Guest]: They do not take anything for granted, or they won't, I mean, it's a simple question
[Guest]: of even asking, looking outside and saying, like, where did the moon come from?
[Guest]: And we see it so often.
[Guest]: But it's not a question and it's not a question that we should discard or, or why does time
[Guest]: move in one direction is the things that after a certain amount of time, we start to take
[Guest]: for granted.
[Guest]: But I think all children have that sense of awe in that wonder.
[Guest]: And I agree with you.
[Guest]: I think children take to the basics of mathematics very, very early on, and then somehow because
[Guest]: of the process of which it is taught that and, and some children are told that they
[Guest]: are not good at it, and they have to do it a certain way that it just, it just gets lost
[Guest]: and it just gets beaten out of them.
[Guest]: But overall, I think that was one of the reasons why I wanted to write this book.
[Guest]: And for me, that was one of the challenges of writing this book is, and writing for the
[Guest]: public was, I will say, after having written perspectives, and editorials and papers for
[Guest]: scientists, it was much harder because there is no common language, I cannot use the language,
[Guest]: the terse, precise way of writing that goes into a paper and assume that the reader will
[Guest]: be able to understand it.
[Guest]: And so starting from first principle, and trying to develop a core set of ideas, was
[Guest]: at least for me, one of the driving principles for for writing this book.
[Guest]: But as people get into their own disciplines, I have also noticed this, this is also true
[Guest]: of the various disciplines of biology or chemistry, they do not, there is very little crosstalk.
[Guest]: And we do see it in in some other disciplines.
[Guest]: And I think we did see a little bit of it during the pandemic with many people from
[Guest]: various disciplines coming together.
[Guest]: But even then, that's not always the case.
[Guest]: We had, just to give you one very, very relevant example with these variants, you know, the
[Guest]: first variant that came out of the UK was B.1.1.7.
[Guest]: And at that point, when that first variant came out, the virologists are the people who
[Guest]: are looking at the viruses and at sort of a virus level and molecular level and at an
[Guest]: infectious level.
[Guest]: The epidemiologists are looking at the spread and the trajectory of spread.
[Guest]: The virologists were saying, okay, mutations happen all the time.
[Guest]: Therefore, we do not think that this, this mutation is anything different, or that it
[Guest]: spreads more.
[Guest]: We have to show us in an animal model that this is, this is spreading more rapidly.
[Guest]: And some virologists that I respect a lot, and have actually written textbooks at that
[Guest]: point in early January, were not believing that this was a more infectious strain or
[Guest]: variant of the virus.
[Guest]: However, epidemiologists who have their own way of looking at data, and they were finding
[Guest]: in the UK that this virus was actually now becoming more prevalent than the original
[Guest]: strain, the lineage from Wuhan and the other mutant that was there, the B614G mutant, which
[Guest]: was predominant at the time.
[Guest]: And so that was sort of a different line of research, no less relevant, but it's just
[Guest]: because of the individual aspects of disciplines that they were not talking to each other.
[Guest]: And I think we'll see more examples of this across all the disciplines, not just biology
[Guest]: or physics, but even, even economics.
[Guest]: My former advisor used to say that if you need to build something, if you need a stool,
[Guest]: a stool has to have three legs.
[Guest]: So you need three, for any major discovery, you have to have at least three independent
[Guest]: ways of corroborating that idea or thought, especially if it is a paradigm shift.
[Guest]: And so what often happens is that when we don't get these different aspects, or these
[Guest]: different groups working together, we don't see the same outcomes.
[Amit Varma]: That's so fascinating.
[Amit Varma]: And what you said about, you know, the virologists here and the epidemiologists there reminds
[Amit Varma]: me of, you know, your first chapter where you speak about the parable of the elephant,
[Amit Varma]: that you know, that old parable, different blind men touch different parts of an elephant
[Amit Varma]: and they see something different.
[Amit Varma]: And of course, your point in the chapter was about the virus in general, and so many different
[Amit Varma]: aspects of this pandemic, but that, you know, seems to be a little there in science also.
[Amit Varma]: Now, sort of three conceptual questions, not conceptual, but three questions around, you
[Amit Varma]: know, different themes.
[Amit Varma]: And the first of them is this, like, when I teach this writing course that I teach,
[Amit Varma]: I often get questions about academic writing, from people who are doing PhDs, or who have
[Amit Varma]: done PhDs and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, because so much of what I talk about the importance of clarity in writing
[Amit Varma]: and all that almost goes very counter to the kind of conventions that exist.
[Amit Varma]: And I point them to this great essay by Agnes Gallard, who, by the way, is a force on Twitter,
[Amit Varma]: I just love her account.
[Amit Varma]: And Gallard had this fine essay, I think about three months ago, four months ago, about why
[Amit Varma]: academic writing is so turgid.
[Amit Varma]: And her point there was that, look, someone's completed a PhD, they are on the sort of tenure
[Amit Varma]: track, what do you need to get tenure, you need to publish specific number of papers
[Amit Varma]: in these specific journals, and all those journals have their own conventions, their
[Amit Varma]: own insider lingo, their own ways of writing.
[Amit Varma]: So you're optimizing for that, you're not optimizing for, say, a larger audience to
[Amit Varma]: get read more widely and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: And then that language seeps into everything else you do, maybe including letters to your
[Amit Varma]: family or whatever, though I would hope not, and you stop thinking about it.
[Amit Varma]: And I was chatting about this with another friend, Ruben Abraham recently, who told me
[Amit Varma]: about how, you know, this might be true for the social sciences, but in science, per se,
[Amit Varma]: the papers tend to be very well written, eight to 12 pages, because they're very crisp, and
[Amit Varma]: they know what they're doing.
[Amit Varma]: And they go from point A to point B, and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: And it's kind of more systematic.
[Amit Varma]: So he gave me a sort of a counter view to this saying that, look, a lot of academic
[Amit Varma]: writing is turgid.
[Amit Varma]: But there is a lot of joy in just reading a lot of science papers, because they kind
[Amit Varma]: of bug the trend.
[Amit Varma]: So now as someone who started off on that academic path, who wrote a paper, which got,
[Amit Varma]: you know, published in Nature and written about by here.
[Amit Varma]: So what is your sort of outlook on all of this?
[Amit Varma]: Like you have also therefore been an editor, you have received a lot of this turgid writing,
[Amit Varma]: you know, is it incredibly commonplace, and therefore a problem, when you sort of suggest
[Amit Varma]: recommendations about, you know, what changes a writer should make or how they should work
[Amit Varma]: on their paper?
[Amit Varma]: Do you also talk about the writing or do you just talk about the science and obviously,
[Amit Varma]: the science is more important because the content matters, but you also talk about the
[Amit Varma]: writing, is that an imperative?
[Amit Varma]: Are these journals sort of, like I understand that they will have specialized audiences,
[Amit Varma]: but would you also like to at least make them readable by the general public at large?
[Amit Varma]: And I'm sort of just kind of thinking aloud, because you seem to be the perfect person
[Amit Varma]: at the intersection of all of this, as both an academic, a writer, an editor, a thinker,
[Amit Varma]: and you know, how do you look at this space?
[Guest]: Yeah, I can definitely provide my own perspective.
[Guest]: And having worked on a number of a few dozen journals and having launched 10 scientific
[Guest]: journals myself, I am regularly reading papers, sometimes I tweet about them as well, I read
[Guest]: the papers in energy, material science, microbiology, chemistry, medicine, engineering, various
[Guest]: fields.
[Guest]: And it's not that I understand all of them, but I have developed a sense of getting at
[Guest]: the gist very easily.
[Guest]: And in new fields, what I do is I usually try to do some background reading.
[Guest]: And so some of the reviews are written in a different manner than some of the scientific
[Guest]: papers.
[Guest]: And that's because the review is more a very large perspective of the field as well.
[Guest]: But a really good paper will tell you more than what the authors have actually written.
[Guest]: It's very terse and turgid, as you say, but you will be able to from that paper, understand
[Guest]: what the background is, what the what the reason is, why they actually did the work,
[Guest]: you will be able to figure out what else has been done and who else is doing that.
[Guest]: You will be able to figure out what experiments they did and what those experiments show.
[Guest]: And you will be able to figure out what the next steps are and and what others are doing.
[Guest]: But a scientific paper typically is not read in the same way that something else will be
[Guest]: read where you, you read the abstract, then you read all the way through.
[Guest]: The way that I usually read scientific paper is I read the abstract, then I look at the
[Guest]: figures, then I look at the discussion at the end, then I go back and it's sort of it's
[Guest]: almost like it's almost like going like hypertext, because if I see something, then I look at
[Guest]: a reference, then I'll go down this rabbit hole of maybe even an hour following a certain
[Guest]: reference down that way.
[Guest]: But you are absolutely right.
[Guest]: Titles matter, especially in this age of even of search engines, where people are finding
[Guest]: a lot of research from from titles of articles, the titles really, really matter.
[Guest]: The abstract has to be very succinct and has to say what has been done.
[Guest]: Lot of journals are now doing what are known as lay summaries, which show the which demonstrate
[Guest]: the significance for a broader audience.
[Guest]: And I am very much in favor of these.
[Guest]: So when I started off as a scientific editor, one of my jobs was to write these two paragraph
[Guest]: in this issue summaries for drug discovery and biology papers.
[Guest]: And so I was going through them and writing those up.
[Guest]: And we even asked a lot of authors to submit that with their submissions as well.
[Guest]: There are other journals that do this, definitely.
[Guest]: I think one of the reasons there is good science writing and there is bad science writing,
[Guest]: undoubtedly.
[Guest]: One of the reasons that science is written in this sort of peculiar way is that it is
[Guest]: very important to be accurate as opposed to be definitive in your pronouncements.
[Guest]: You have to say what you're saying, but you also have to say these are the limitations.
[Guest]: And that doesn't always make for a compelling read.
[Guest]: And I think a lot of people who peddle in misinformation, and I've noticed this, they
[Guest]: have an easier time because they don't need nuance, right?
[Guest]: They don't need to say that this is this particular case under these conditions.
[Guest]: And this is the setting and this is how much immunity you have.
[Guest]: But look at this, immunity is not just the antibodies.
[Guest]: You have all these other parts of the cells and you have T cells and these other components.
[Guest]: They can just say, well, drink my concoction and you'll never get coronavirus.
[Guest]: And those things are the ones that has no nuance and it's sort of seductive in a way
[Guest]: in that they're very, I look at these WhatsApp forwards, they're actually, people should
[Guest]: be doing research on them because they are very simple in what they're trying to demonstrate.
[Guest]: And this completely the antithesis of what you're saying.
[Guest]: But at some point, scientists do have to become science communicators.
[Guest]: They have to be able to, because scientists are a part of society.
[Guest]: The problem is that there really is no incentive for a scientist.
[Guest]: The reward structures in science are created in such a way that scientists are always talking
[Guest]: to other scientists.
[Guest]: They are talking to administrators, they are trying to get grants.
[Guest]: So by writing, for example, a popular science book, there is, a scientist is not going to
[Guest]: get tenure, is not going to get a promotion.
[Guest]: So I think people that do it, do it out of a sense of compulsion and maybe they have
[Guest]: a little bit more free time.
[Guest]: But you're absolutely right.
[Guest]: There is a peculiar and precise way of writing in science that is almost like you have to
[Guest]: learn another language.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, no, the problem you've expressed is very resonant.
[Amit Varma]: Because the thing is, you know, the reason these, like I'm also fascinated by all the
[Amit Varma]: fake news that spreads.
[Amit Varma]: And one of the things that they get right in terms of craft is that they keep it simple.
[Amit Varma]: We explain the world to ourselves by telling stories about it.
[Amit Varma]: And simpler stories are far easier to process.
[Amit Varma]: You don't, you know, you don't have to consider a hundred nuances and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: And again, I couldn't agree with you more.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, this is, you know, in a different context, my friend Ajay Shah, who's a public
[Amit Varma]: policy guy and a great economist is also sort of, he keeps, you know, lamenting that so
[Amit Varma]: many economists are on this sort of academic treadmill, where they are pursuing a set of
[Amit Varma]: different incentives.
[Amit Varma]: And if they, you know, if the incentives were slightly more aligned to say the public good,
[Amit Varma]: which comes from, you know, communicating your ideas clearly and well, getting them
[Amit Varma]: out there, doing research that actually goes in those directions, rather than whatever
[Amit Varma]: might be fashionable in academics at the moment, perhaps the world would be a better place.
[Amit Varma]: Now, the thing about that I loved about your book is that it's like, I don't want to embarrass
[Amit Varma]: you with praise, but I thought it's just outstanding in terms of popular science writing, because
[Amit Varma]: you simplify everything so much, like not in a way of making it simplistic, but in a
[Amit Varma]: way of making it easy to understand in clear language, like a schoolboy with a lot of questions
[Amit Varma]: could get a lot of his questions answered through this book, without having a problem
[Amit Varma]: with it.
[Amit Varma]: Now, this process of clear writing, I want to ask you a little bit about that, you know,
[Amit Varma]: a few weeks ago, Krish Ashok did an episode with me where he spoke about the pyramid of
[Amit Varma]: learning, like, how do you learn something the best, like somebody says something to
[Amit Varma]: you, you learn it one way, you read something, you learn it at a different depth, but the
[Amit Varma]: deepest way of learning is to teach something. And in a sense, trying to write clearly for
[Amit Varma]: a mass audience is a form of teaching. And another thing that you know, Orwell had first
[Amit Varma]: brought about, and I keep talking about in my writing classes, a link between clear thinking
[Amit Varma]: and clear writing, and how it's a two way link, like, obviously, for a clear thinker,
[Amit Varma]: you're more likely to write clearly. But if you are forcing yourself to write clearly
[Amit Varma]: about a subject, then you have to force yourself to think deeply about it. Because then you
[Amit Varma]: cannot take cover in jargon or insider lingo, or, you know, obfuscatory abstract language,
[Amit Varma]: you have to get concrete, you have to explain everything in kind of simple terms, which
[Amit Varma]: you know, you've done repeatedly through the book, you know, I just noted down so many
[Amit Varma]: of your quotes, like proteins being like origami, or your chapter on concepts where you've spoken
[Amit Varma]: about the importance of shape, you quoted Carl Sagan, talking about apple pie, which
[Amit Varma]: I'll come to. And all of this is just utterly sort of delightful. So and nobody starts off
[Amit Varma]: a clear writer, right? It takes a lot of work. I mean, another thing, you know, an aside
[Amit Varma]: for my listeners would be that I believe writing is one of those things which you don't need
[Amit Varma]: any inherent quality. Everybody can be a great writer. It's just a question of making the
[Amit Varma]: effort. It's not like cricket that there's a certain hand-eye coordination that is natural
[Amit Varma]: or bowlers need fast twitch muscles or whatever. Everybody can learn to be a great writer period.
[Amit Varma]: So and everybody starts off bad, obviously, tell me about your journey as a writer, you
[Amit Varma]: know, thinking about how to make complex subjects easily understandable to a lay audience. And
[Amit Varma]: I feel that this must have been so much harder for you. Because in the environment that you're
[Amit Varma]: in, where you're reading turgid paper after turgid paper submitted by academics and my
[Amit Varma]: apologies to academics, I don't mean to say they're all like this, but relatively, certainly.
[Amit Varma]: What was your journey discovering your kind of writing voice? What were your role models?
[Amit Varma]: What was your journey? What was it like? Tell me a bit about that.
[Guest]: Well, first of all, thank you so much for the praise. It is slightly embarrassing. But
[Guest]: also, I have to tell you this, now that you mentioned it. One of the most puzzling but
[Guest]: also in a backhanded way, rewarding messages I got was from my sister. So she's an engineer.
[Guest]: And she sent me a message after she read the book. And it was like, Wow, Dada, you wrote
[Guest]: a science book that's not like a science book at all. And it's sort of a backhanded way
[Guest]: of saying like, reminding me of all the horrible textbooks that I read. And I was like, Okay,
[Guest]: she's an engineer, but I really know where she's coming from with that. And but because
[Guest]: she's a sister, it cannot be sort of a direct phrase, there has to be like this, this sense
[Guest]: of like, how did you even do this? I, I underestimated you. But well, thank you so much for that.
[Guest]: I will say that one of the things is that basically, I did think a lot about the analogies
[Guest]: to use. And, and for me, I am a little bit, I like to think, obviously, mathematically,
[Guest]: but I'm also a visual thinker. And sometimes breaking down these, these concepts into into
[Guest]: visual pieces is very, very helpful. Fortunately, obviously, I can't embed a YouTube video into
[Guest]: a book. But fortunately, the process of infection is such and the process of how the immune
[Guest]: system responds, and how disease develops. And that whole cycle is such that you can
[Guest]: sit down and basically visualize it. And so that took me a while though, as you mentioned,
[Guest]: each individual part of that is one sentence in that book might actually be someone's science
[Guest]: paper or nature paper, or even some some major observation that it took them a while to do.
[Guest]: But pieced together, if you just break it down, as you mentioned early on into the individual
[Guest]: parts of, okay, how, first of all, starting from how big is the virus? How big is the
[Guest]: cell? What does it need to do to actually get inside the body? I mean, there are millions
[Guest]: of viruses and you starting back and saying, why are there only 220 viruses that infect
[Guest]: the human body? I mean, we always say, okay, viruses, they're, they're harming us. But
[Guest]: there, among the vast number of viruses, there are only a few. So there is something special
[Guest]: about this virus compared to other viruses. And then taking it to the next step of trying
[Guest]: to visualize those processes, for me, at least, was very helpful. As far as right, the actual
[Guest]: writing process itself, you are absolutely right, it was iterative. And it was iterative
[Guest]: in the sense of also that the data was changing. I went through multiple drafts, this was not
[Guest]: a static. This was not a static subject where I could go through a research phase and collect
[Guest]: all the papers and then sit down in my room and then go through a writing phase. This
[Guest]: was a project where I was doing the research and the writing simultaneously. And so I went
[Guest]: through many drafts of writing this. But whenever I was reading a paper, apart from annotating
[Guest]: it and marking it up, what I was also doing is I would write a summary of that paper.
[Guest]: And then after I wrote that summary, I would come back to it asking myself, why would somebody
[Guest]: who is not a scientist be interested in this? What would they actually get out of it that
[Guest]: would be relevant to the bigger picture of SARS-CoV-2 and COVID-19? And often what would
[Guest]: happen is that then that summary, which was two paragraphs, would then be condensed into
[Guest]: maybe two sentences. And then after that, I would start to expand that because you don't
[Guest]: also want to leave them with basically without any particular context or any perspective
[Guest]: of what this might mean. So I don't know how successful I was, but that was the process
[Guest]: that I had to use. And then integrating it together. I also, as you probably have noticed,
[Guest]: when I wrote the book, I also had a framework of basically systematically deciding what
[Guest]: each of these chapters would be and breaking it down into that. And that was very, very
[Guest]: helpful to have those specific buckets. And so that I didn't go off in a way that I would
[Guest]: if I had been doing another form of writing such as poetry or creative writing.
[Amit Varma]: And did those buckets come at the start? Like, did you sit down at the start and first make
[Amit Varma]: the structure and then say, I'll go according to the structure? Or does it kind of evolve
[Guest]: as it goes along?
[Guest]: That evolved. I had a little bit of a sense of what I wanted to write. But when I was
[Guest]: first thinking about this project, I did not know the final shape of what this book would
[Guest]: actually be. And I have to thank my publishers for for putting up with me and for letting
[Guest]: me hand in a book that was slightly different or maybe significantly different from the
[Amit Varma]: proposal that I wrote.
[Amit Varma]: Another crazy thing that kind of strikes me about it is like you correctly said, everything
[Amit Varma]: is changing while you're writing, right? So people often speak of journalism as the first
[Amit Varma]: draft of history, which, you know, has its dangers as well. And while you're writing
[Amit Varma]: this book, in a sense, it is not a definitive book of everything that the COVID-19 is about,
[Amit Varma]: because we are still learning so much about it. We are in a sense, you know, in a fog
[Amit Varma]: of war situation, where there are so many things that we don't know. So is that something
[Amit Varma]: that kind of worried you? Or I mean, for the majority of the book, of course, you've looked
[Amit Varma]: at basic concepts and first principles and just kind of explained everything from scratch.
[Amit Varma]: And you've, you know, there's nothing in it that is in a sense going to be falsified,
[Amit Varma]: so to say, you've, you know, but it can provide a lay reader a bedrock of understanding exactly
[Amit Varma]: what is going on, which is what is so good about it. But how do you how do you then in
[Amit Varma]: the in the process of writing? Is there a point and this is relevant, not just to the
[Amit Varma]: knowledge that you're putting in the book, but also in the in terms of crafting the writing
[Amit Varma]: itself, that does there come a point where you say that, listen, I'm not totally happy,
[Amit Varma]: but I have to let it go now. Because I'm guessing that, you know, complete satisfaction with
[Amit Varma]: whatever is there is kind of impossible, right? So what was that like for you? Did you did
[Amit Varma]: you have imposter syndrome? Did you did you think that, you know, can I do this? What
[Guest]: was that like?
[Guest]: So one thing I did do will say is that it is important to have this sense of epistemic
[Guest]: humility that in a pandemic, you cannot know every single aspect of what is going on. And
[Guest]: this is why it was a lot of work, but it was helpful to actually have references and notes
[Guest]: in the back of the book where I could reference the experts and say, this particular sentence
[Guest]: or this particular idea, which is prevalent at the time is not an idea that I have come
[Guest]: up with, because I think a book, maybe if I write fiction in the future, that I will
[Guest]: come up with something more imaginative, but a book on public health during a pandemic
[Guest]: is not a time for significant independent theories or unsubstantiated ideas. So all
[Guest]: of those chapters, I'm not an expert, I want to stress again, that I'm not an expert, I
[Guest]: relied on my ability to translate the science and to condense it. But all of those aspects
[Guest]: are cited in the back and people can use that as a jumping off point, as you mentioned,
[Guest]: after they have a sense of the broader landscape. So I did not want it to be this scientific
[Guest]: document or this monograph at all. As far as leaving it at a certain point, yes, there
[Guest]: were aspects that obviously, I could have pursued further. And we don't have the answers
[Guest]: to that. One thing you will notice about the book is I've always said, this is what we
[Guest]: don't know. And I've used that as to the best of my ability to say, this information is
[Guest]: unknown at this point of time, it may take us six months, it may take us years to look
[Guest]: into this. And that varied from some very contentious issues, such as the lockdown,
[Guest]: to prior immunity, to the various, the extreme heterogeneity of people who are getting very
[Guest]: sick to people who are having asymptomatic infections, to long COVID, or post COVID syndrome,
[Guest]: which affects different people in different ways. And so I left it at that with a sense
[Guest]: of being comfortable with saying that, I don't know this, nobody knows definitively at this
[Guest]: time. It was a good stopping off point in that I knew about the vaccines. So I think
[Guest]: this, I would have felt a little bit bad, if the book had been written, and it had come
[Guest]: out before we had approved vaccines. I also knew about the UK variant and that it was
[Guest]: more infectious. I had not foreseen or didn't know about the other variants. And perhaps
[Guest]: that can be sort of an additional appendix, or a 23rd chapter. But I did know that the
[Guest]: variant was coming and that it had been shown that it was more infectious. So at that point,
[Guest]: I did have that sense of what was going to be happening in the next few months, at least.
[Guest]: What this book has absolutely avoided is going into the daily numbers and into the daily
[Guest]: curves. And I did that for a number of reasons. One is that it reduces the shelf life of a
[Guest]: book of this nature. The second aspect of this is that it takes us away from the sense
[Guest]: of humility. Because even when I was writing this book, I said during the first wave, there
[Guest]: were some countries that had fared well. One of them was Germany. And Germany got absolutely
[Guest]: devastated during the winter because of some measures that they didn't take, but also because
[Guest]: of the variant strains as well. And then I was very careful in not making any precise
[Guest]: prognostications about the trajectory of the pandemic in India and what was happening.
[Guest]: Because I wasn't riding the wave and I didn't want to ride the wave of saying, well, the
[Guest]: cases went down because Indians have immunity. And then regretting a few months later, well,
[Guest]: I was wrong here, the cases went up. And so I tried to avoid that as much as possible.
[Guest]: With all of that said, because I'm in a field where the shelf life of documents and of papers
[Guest]: is very short to begin with, this is something that we are all resigned to. I know that when
[Guest]: I wrote my thesis, when I write papers, when any one of us writes anything, it is going
[Guest]: to get outdated pretty soon. So we try to do our best. The book allowed me an opportunity
[Guest]: to, as you pointed out, and thank you for saying that, try to bring in the broader concepts,
[Guest]: which I hope will not be obsolete in the near future.
[Amit Varma]: So I'll just inform our listeners at this point that this is actually being recorded
[Amit Varma]: on April 13th, 2021, though it is April 12th where Anirwan is. So do consider that the
[Amit Varma]: miracle that I am asking my questions on the 13th and he is answering them on the 12th,
[Amit Varma]: the miracles of science, perhaps. I'm struck by this phrase that you used, epistemic humility,
[Amit Varma]: because I used it in a prior episode. And then one of my guests used it in a previous
[Amit Varma]: episode, in an episode after that, when we were talking about COVID, in fact, the policy
[Amit Varma]: responses to it. And someone wrote into me saying, hey, Amit, you say never use jargon,
[Amit Varma]: why have you? But yeah, but in a sense, you know, to not to cut the jargon part of it,
[Amit Varma]: you can say it's just about being humble about what you know. And that's kind of what I want
[Amit Varma]: to ask you about, because it strikes me that there is, if you're achieving excellence in
[Amit Varma]: anything, you know, there is this balance to be struck between having confidence in
[Amit Varma]: what you are, what you know, and what you're capable of, and also having the humility to
[Amit Varma]: learn more. And, you know, an example I often give is, you know, people think Virat Kohli
[Amit Varma]: is like a very aggro kind of person, arrogant and full of himself. But to get to the level
[Amit Varma]: where he is, he must have spent 1000s of hours in the nets focusing on what he's doing wrong.
[Amit Varma]: So there is an inbuilt humility in that process. Now, in the world of science, also, it strikes
[Amit Varma]: me that if you're too humble, if you think that I don't know anything, everything could
[Amit Varma]: be wrong, it possibly becomes difficult to proceed. So you have to have a certain amount
[Amit Varma]: of belief in your knowledge and the value of the work you are doing, and so on and so
[Amit Varma]: forth. But at the same time, there also has to be a certain amount of humility, like what
[Amit Varma]: you pointed out in the clash between or the argument between the virologists and the epidemiologists.
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, there has to be that humility and that openness. And you can't just sit
[Amit Varma]: back and say that, no, this is my field, who are these other lay people to, you know, comment
[Amit Varma]: on it and, you know, make Twitter threads about something that they haven't actually
[Amit Varma]: received training in. So, given that you are someone who's obviously, due to the work due
[Amit Varma]: to being an editor, due to being a science writer, or, you know, that's inbuilt in you.
[Amit Varma]: But when you look at all these people who are submitting papers, people who are working
[Amit Varma]: on the cutting edge of science, how does that come in? What is the level of humility you
[Amit Varma]: think that we need? You know, is this a trap that people fall into, of not having adequate
[Amit Varma]: humility? What's your take on this?
[Guest]: I think scientists as a group, fill all sorts, you will find people who are absolutely humble
[Guest]: and down to earth and will, and these are even Nobel Prize winners that you can approach
[Guest]: them and you can talk to them and they will have coffee with you and they will discuss
[Guest]: the science with you. And scientists in general, the one thing is they'll do love to talk about
[Guest]: their work with anyone. I think that is basically the hook to if you're talking to anyone from
[Guest]: someone starting off with their lab or someone who has won the Nobel Prize. If you just ask
[Guest]: them what they do and why they do it, they can go on for a really long time. But there
[Guest]: are people who are very good at, and at a certain extent, you are absolutely right.
[Guest]: You have to play up the value of your work. And sometimes that is actually exaggerated.
[Guest]: The thing is other scientists are, after a while, very good at picking up on those exaggerations.
[Guest]: I don't think the public always is, and sometimes the press can even be taken for a ride. So
[Guest]: I don't blame the press for this when a scientist said, well, and we see a lot of this in the
[Guest]: media as well, when someone says, well, I have now created this molecule in my lab and
[Guest]: it works really well against cancer cells. And so it gets, and they get taken in by that.
[Guest]: But someone in the field would also know that the path to drugs is treacherous. Very few
[Guest]: promising drugs actually make it down that path to actually become drugs that become
[Guest]: approved and used in humans. And so some people are very, very good about exploiting that
[Guest]: and using that to their benefit. But you're right. So everyone has to do it to a certain
[Guest]: extent. Complete humility doesn't get you anywhere. I mean, nobody knows what you're
[Guest]: doing and there has to be a certain amount of excitement also conveyed to the audience.
[Guest]: And that has to come across both in the way that scientists speak, but also in the way
[Guest]: that they write. Otherwise, it's just a collection of facts. And so they may seem like dry stories,
[Guest]: but a lot of the research articles are actually presented in the form of a narrative. It's
[Guest]: a different form of a narrative, but it is a narrative.
[Amit Varma]: And you mentioned the press and I'm reminded of this phrase that Michael Crichton coined
[Amit Varma]: in honor of his friend Murray Gell-Mann, you know, is Gell-Mann amnesia, which basically
[Amit Varma]: means that, you know, if you're the specialist in a field and you read something in a general
[Amit Varma]: newspaper on your subject, you realize that is bullshit, that the guy just doesn't get
[Amit Varma]: it. But when you read the rest of the newspaper, you take it as gospel because, hey, it's in
[Amit Varma]: a big newspaper. Now, you know, journalists tend to be generalists and that's more true
[Amit Varma]: today than ever, you know, Prem Panikkar in a recent episode with me spoke about how this
[Amit Varma]: is one of the things where Indian journalism is just in a horrendous place that you have
[Amit Varma]: cost cutting. It's always journalists who are let go. And if you have less journalists,
[Amit Varma]: you have more journalists. If you have, sorry, if you have less journalists, you have more
[Amit Varma]: generalists and you know, so your science beat reporter with a few notable exceptions
[Amit Varma]: won't necessarily be someone who really gets it. And that can actually harm, you know,
[Amit Varma]: how the people sort of understand science. So a dual question here. One is that, is this
[Amit Varma]: a big problem and are there ways around it? And the other question is that what technology
[Amit Varma]: has run in the last 20 years is that any specialist can go out there and put, you know, her views
[Amit Varma]: out there. You can start a blog, you can start a newsletter, you can make YouTube videos,
[Amit Varma]: all the technology is within our reach. So you don't have these gatekeepers anymore,
[Amit Varma]: anyone can communicate. Of course, the gatekeepers fulfill a useful function of being a filter
[Amit Varma]: for quality. But you could argue that water finds its own level in any case. So, you know,
[Amit Varma]: whether you're on YouTube or blogging, ultimately, the quality of your work will determine the
[Amit Varma]: kind of credibility that you have. So there is this dual thing where, you know, journalism
[Amit Varma]: and I find and I find that that this is inevitably true. Whenever I read journalism about a subject,
[Amit Varma]: I know something about I am like WTF is this, you know, and but at the same time, what I
[Amit Varma]: am heartened by is that a lot of people who are either specialists or are sort of passionate
[Amit Varma]: about a subject are going out making their own content, all of that. So, you know, in
[Amit Varma]: the broader context of bringing science to the people of sort of popularizing all of
[Amit Varma]: this, what do you think? What's the ecosystem like? How is this playing out?
[Guest]: This is a very good question. And I think I want to say that despite some of the challenges,
[Guest]: many journalists during the pandemic, despite the constraints and the lack of information
[Guest]: and knowledge, have done a tremendous job. And there are some Indian journalists as well
[Guest]: who have even in the midst of even when the transparency hasn't been 100%, they have tried
[Guest]: to get the best information. And so I do want to applaud them for for what they've done.
[Guest]: As you mentioned, we all have our narrow focuses. And I can speak to what happens in in science
[Guest]: and in science journalism. And I think the first thing that has to happen is that people
[Guest]: need to be fine with with paying for good content. I mean, that's that's essentially
[Guest]: where it starts. Good journalism takes time, it takes money, and it takes it's a person's
[Guest]: profession. And so we have to be fine with paying for it. And then once we pay for it,
[Guest]: we have to be fine with investing in those organizations. And in those journalists, I
[Guest]: think if newsrooms are getting cut, and if newspapers are worried about about their science
[Guest]: pages, then that's going to have an effect despite regardless of everything else, that's
[Guest]: definitely going to have an effect. The other thing is that science takes time to get answers.
[Guest]: And if sometimes if someone has a deadline that they have to get something out, that
[Guest]: is 500, 600 words, by by 4pm, or 9pm, then it becomes very difficult to get a full story
[Guest]: to be able to do that background reading and to get that research done. And so often what
[Guest]: happens is that we see results that are presented uncritically without the broader picture,
[Guest]: the broader framework of of what actually happened there. So often, it is just a rehash
[Guest]: of the press release, and then a bunch of quotes from different people. And it's sort
[Guest]: of this drip drip system of getting news out that doesn't put the picture in a bigger context.
[Guest]: I would also say that journalists often strive for balance. And balance isn't always necessarily
[Guest]: a necessarily a good thing if we're talking about topics like deforestation, or climate
[Guest]: change or pollution, or, or air pollution, or groundwater being polluted. And you bring
[Guest]: in all the scientists on one side, and then you bring in either the person who's polluting,
[Guest]: or you bring in all the people who believe or have data that backs up climate change,
[Guest]: anthropogenic climate change, and then you bring in industry interests on the other side.
[Guest]: That's not balance. And so putting what happens is if you put both sets of quotes together,
[Guest]: then it looks like that it's balanced. But I think journalists have to be reporters have
[Guest]: to be fine with moving away from that sense of balance, with that sense of reporting everything
[Guest]: as a as a short piece of something and trying to instead bring it into a framework of putting
[Guest]: more context into it. But all of that requires money.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, no, there's that old thing that journalists say that, you know, if you're a journalist,
[Amit Varma]: and one person tells you it's raining, and the other person tells you it isn't raining,
[Amit Varma]: your job isn't to report both of them, it is to go to the window and report what you
[Amit Varma]: see outside. And, you know, but this becomes difficult if you're a generalist, and you
[Amit Varma]: have to turn in a piece by four o'clock, because you don't possibly have the base of knowledge
[Amit Varma]: to be able to make those judgments yourself, which is why I think we kind of need more
[Amit Varma]: specialists. You know, speaking of journalists, you know, the outliers who have done a great
[Amit Varma]: job really stand out. I've loved the work of Zainab Tufekci, for example, during this
[Amit Varma]: pandemic, I think some of her reporting has been outstanding. Before we actually get to
[Amit Varma]: your book, a few, a couple of more sort of questions about, you know, your personal processes
[Amit Varma]: and thinking and all of that. What do you do for knowledge management? Because you're
[Amit Varma]: taking in a lot of information, especially for this book, you know, it's written in very
[Amit Varma]: simple language, so it doesn't appear to, but it's packed with, you know, information
[Amit Varma]: and insight. What do you do for knowledge management are the particular apps that you
[Amit Varma]: use? And in general, this is surely something that even outside the context of this book,
[Amit Varma]: something that you must have kind of faced, you know, maybe in the context of productivity,
[Amit Varma]: but even otherwise, you must be reading so much. Are there some hacks or tips or processes
[Amit Varma]: that you've adopted?
[Guest]: Yeah, I read a lot. And even though the book has a few hundred references, I read over
[Guest]: 1000 papers, even just writing this book, 1000 scientific papers. And I would say, for
[Guest]: a time, I was reading all the major stories in Indian Express, Washington Post and the
[Guest]: New York Times, particularly during that lockdown phase, when there were a lot of reports coming
[Guest]: out. And, and I use Mendeley, which is a reference manager. And so what it has is it has this
[Guest]: web plugin, where when I go to the website of a publisher, scientific publisher, and
[Guest]: I see that, that paper, I can click on the PDF, and it will immediately download that
[Guest]: PDF and put it into the database. And then in the database, it's also a reference manager,
[Guest]: it has all the references there. So I can see all of those papers, and later I can I
[Guest]: can read those, I read and annotate on my iPad. And I like to use the highlighter feature
[Guest]: to do that as well. I still sometimes take for the for the actual outlines of the chapters,
[Guest]: I use notebooks, I like to basically draw mind maps, and and do that, go through that
[Guest]: process for for doing that as well. So I would say those are the the main ways that I, I
[Guest]: decided, or I figured out how to do it. There are some really good accounts on Twitter that
[Guest]: are a good source of information in terms of so I did bookmark a certain number of tweets
[Guest]: of of people as well, to get some information. As far as my own Twitter account, I used it
[Guest]: as as a test testing ground for seeing what people were interested in over the course
[Guest]: of the year, they didn't know I was writing a book, I hadn't decided at that point either.
[Guest]: But how I was framing things, whether that was useful or not. And I did a couple of of
[Guest]: polls as well through the year, that definitely helped me out with that. One thing about the
[Guest]: coronavirus pandemic, I'll say is that almost all scientific publishers made their coronavirus
[Guest]: content free and outside of the paywall. And that was beneficial for someone like me. And
[Guest]: this didn't this wasn't only with respect to the scientific publishers, I do subscribe
[Guest]: to the New York Times and the Washington Post and Indian Express. But even they made the
[Guest]: US publishers made their coronavirus content free.
[Amit Varma]: Fabulous. And, you know, as this is still ongoing, and we're all searching for information,
[Amit Varma]: are there are there sort of which are the Twitter handles you said that you follow that
[Amit Varma]: you considered the best sources on this as it was unfolding? And also at a general level,
[Amit Varma]: which are the best sources for understanding popular science, like in the context of economics,
[Amit Varma]: for example, you have that great blog Marginal Revolution, which is, you know, done such
[Amit Varma]: human service in, you know, popularizing the just the field in general. So let's say someone
[Amit Varma]: is interested in science, they want to learn more about it. Like after my friend Ruben
[Amit Varma]: Abraham told me about, you know, he sent me a bunch of science papers, which he's been
[Amit Varma]: reading over the last few weeks, which he really likes, and I was kind of struck by
[Amit Varma]: them. So let's say you're speaking to a layperson like me, I want to kind of know more about
[Amit Varma]: what's happening on the cutting edge of science, I want to know who to follow, and whose work
[Amit Varma]: is interesting. And, you know, are there blogs, are there Twitter handles? How does someone
[Amit Varma]: like me navigate this complex and messy field?
[Guest]: Yeah, it's a good question. I will first answer the first part of that about the during the
[Guest]: Coronavirus pandemic, certain people that I definitely would recommend following. One
[Guest]: of them is at Eric Topol. So Dr. Eric Topol, who is at the Scripps Research Institute,
[Guest]: and he is sort of a renaissance man of medicine. He is a cardiologist by training, but he's
[Guest]: been on top of the Coronavirus pandemic. His, his work, his tweets are mainly covering the
[Guest]: scientific articles. So some of it may be a little bit technical, but he covers all
[Guest]: the major outlets, nature, science, cell, and some of the other journals as well. Whatever
[Guest]: comes out, you will probably see some of the main conclusions in his, in his Twitter account,
[Guest]: in his Twitter feed. I also follow Angie Rasmussen. She's moving to, she's a professor moving
[Guest]: to Saskatchewan in Canada now. She's a fantastic virologist, but she also has a no nonsense
[Guest]: way of presenting concepts in virology in a way that's very digestible to people. Natalie
[Guest]: Dean is a professor in Florida, and she's a bio statistician. And that is very, very
[Guest]: helpful to understand the statistical aspects and the mathematics beyond the, for example,
[Guest]: the efficacy trials and herd immunity and things like that. Mark Lipsitch is a professor
[Guest]: at Harvard Chan, and he is one of the leading epidemiologists who talked about the parameters
[Guest]: of the pandemic early on. Karl Bergstrom is at University of Washington. He's written
[Guest]: this book called Calling Bullshit with Jevin West. And that is about misinformation and
[Guest]: dealing with, with misinformation. And his Twitter account is a source of a lot of great
[Guest]: wisdom regarding misinformation during the pandemic. Adam Kucharski is at, is in the
[Guest]: UK, I think at a School of Tropical Medicine, if I'm, if I'm not mistaken, and he has some
[Guest]: really good work. He's written the Rules of Contagion, which is a book written before
[Guest]: the pandemic, but it has some of the mathematical aspects of, of how to deal with pandemics
[Guest]: and the parameters of that. And there are some other accounts as well. Ed Yong, obviously,
[Guest]: Carl Zimmer, Helen Branswell, they are writing some absolutely top notch work as well. In
[Guest]: terms of following the science as it is coming out, I would say there are some really good
[Guest]: Twitter accounts. So there's a news account for Science Magazine and a news account for
[Guest]: Nature. The news articles in Science and Nature are definitely geared towards more of a lay
[Guest]: audience as opposed to the peer reviewed scientific research that gets published there. I also
[Guest]: get the Nature newsletter every day. It's a very nice newsletter that has a roundup
[Guest]: of all aspects of science in a very accessible manner, including, for example, the search
[Guest]: for life on, on Venus and the search for life on Mars and things like that. So it's, it
[Guest]: gives a broader perspective of that. For those who are interested in biology, at a slightly
[Guest]: deeper level, there is a magazine called The Scientist. And that covers a lot of in depth
[Guest]: articles in science as well. So but I think following some Twitter accounts and then getting
[Guest]: some newsletters is definitely very helpful in keeping up to date.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, and I'll put links to all of these in the show notes. And whichever ones of these
[Amit Varma]: I'm familiar with, I agree with completely. In fact, talking about Eric Topol, I produced
[Amit Varma]: a show also called Brave New World, which is an interview show hosted by Vasanth Dhar.
[Amit Varma]: He had been a guest on the scene and the unseen a few weeks ago. And he does a show called
[Amit Varma]: Brave New World. And we had Eric Topol as a guest on there. So, you know, so Vasanth
[Amit Varma]: and Eric had a delightful conversation. This was episode four of Brave New World. The title
[Amit Varma]: of the episode is Human and Artificial Intelligence in Healthcare. And Eric's book Deep Medicine
[Amit Varma]: is also quite so eye opening in different ways, isn't it?
[Guest]: Yeah, absolutely. And this is the thing about Dr. Eric Topol that that absolutely amazes
[Guest]: me is that he goes from one day talking about about wearables for preventing heart disease
[Guest]: to the next day, having an opinion about on mass and an asymptomatic spread of COVID-19.
[Guest]: So he has a deep and wide grasp of many aspects in medicine.
[Amit Varma]: It's so incredible that it's now that we can have public intellectuals of this sort because
[Amit Varma]: technology makes it so possible for them to get their voice out to sort of, you know,
[Amit Varma]: build these sort of presences in people's lives using tech. So a couple of questions
[Amit Varma]: while we are, you know, before we actually get take a break and get to your book, who
[Amit Varma]: were your influences when it comes to science writing? You know, like when you sort of start
[Amit Varma]: thinking about the notion that science needs to be popularised that it cannot just be academics
[Amit Varma]: talking to each other. When you think about writing your own book, is there something
[Amit Varma]: that you're looking at as a model and saying, you know, this book nailed it or this is a
[Amit Varma]: kind of voice that I want and so on. So what was sort of influences in that sense? And
[Amit Varma]: they don't even have to be overt influences where, you know, you take a model from something
[Amit Varma]: or whatever, but which are the science books that you have loved reading as you have grown
[Amit Varma]: up? Or, you know, is there a book that kind of changed the way you think about the world
[Amit Varma]: or that caused that moment where you know, a light bulb goes on in your head and you
[Amit Varma]: see things differently?
[Guest]: One of my favourite science writers definitely is Carl Sagan. And I've quoted him, and I
[Guest]: admire him deeply. And his way of connecting and bringing the social passion, the passion
[Guest]: for social justice into science and the broader picture is absolutely evident. And people,
[Guest]: when they talk about Carl Sagan, they talk about Cosmos. But the Demon Haunted World
[Guest]: is a much, much better and deeper book. Cosmos was a companion to a television show that
[Guest]: was that I came out, I believe came out in 79 or 80, whereas the Demon Haunted World
[Guest]: was much later and contained full length articles. So definitely, I like his work. I feel that
[Guest]: the physicists do a much better job in general than the biologists in conveying maybe because
[Guest]: their questions are grander on a grand on a much grander scale. So if you think about
[Guest]: like Brian Greene or Michio Kaku or Jim Al-Khalili, who wrote what I thought was the best science
[Guest]: book last year, which is The World According to Physics, has done a really, really good
[Guest]: job with respect to that. I read voraciously. So I read last year, I read about 100 books,
[Guest]: of which many of them were definitely science books. Michael Benton does a tremendous job
[Guest]: in talking about dinosaurs. And I think that's a topic that a lot of people are interested
[Guest]: in. So yeah, there are definitely a lot of people who do write well. In general, my observation
[Guest]: is that the physicists do a much better job than the biologists.
[Amit Varma]: That's fascinating. And you know, you mentioned Sagan and I love this quote from your book
[Amit Varma]: where you quote Sagan saying, quote, if you wish to make an apple pie from scratch, you
[Amit Varma]: must first invent the universe, stop quote, which is such a fantastic quote and which
[Amit Varma]: applies to like just so many things, you know, it's beautiful. Now, my final question before
[Amit Varma]: the break and before we get to both the delightful subject of your book and the difficult subject
[Amit Varma]: of COVID-19, which is that through the process of writing this book, how have you changed?
[Amit Varma]: How has it changed you as a person, as a writer, as someone who thinks about the world, you
[Amit Varma]: know, because writing forces you not just to examine your subject that much more deeply,
[Amit Varma]: it also forces you to examine yourself, you know, and especially in these difficult times,
[Amit Varma]: I think there's a lot of self reflection everyone has kind of gone through, which for a writer
[Amit Varma]: can become explicit, because sometimes they're writing about it, sometimes they're not, maybe
[Amit Varma]: it's not even in the book, maybe it's in sort of the meditative tweets that you might put
[Amit Varma]: out once in a while. But through this period, through the last few months, when you've written
[Amit Varma]: this book, how have you kind of personally changed? How are you different from what you
[Amit Varma]: were say, you know, 15 months ago?
[Guest]: Yeah, I had never planned to write this book. This was I never thought that this would be
[Guest]: my first book. If I thought that I would be writing something I had actually thought that
[Guest]: I would be writing perhaps fiction or in Bangla or meditative essays about about travel or
[Guest]: cooking or something of that nature. But when the pandemic struck, I felt and people were
[Guest]: asking me all these questions, I felt that there was because of my experience, I had
[Guest]: at least something that I could offer. And so I felt that it was a sense of obligation
[Guest]: that I had to write this. It was a very humbling experience, the entire pandemic, but the course
[Guest]: of writing. And, and I will say that I am now more attuned to myself and more. I think
[Guest]: I'm fine with saying I don't know, and I'm fine with more uncertainty now. I was more
[Guest]: certain about certain things at the start of the pandemic. And as and moving forward,
[Guest]: that has changed. I had started with the idea of writing a book that would be a mainly a
[Guest]: scientific book, but very early on, it became evident that that the science alone was not
[Guest]: going to determine the outcome of this pandemic, it's not going to determine the outcome of
[Guest]: any aspect of the major challenges that humans face today, including climate change or deforestation
[Guest]: or antimicrobial resistance. Science is probably one of the easier pieces. I mean, if we look
[Guest]: at the scientists worked hard, they got the vaccines created in time. But that is just
[Guest]: a small piece of of the larger tapestry of society and all the the the components that
[Guest]: go into this pandemic. And the other realization was that every single source of inequality
[Guest]: or of injustice that we had in our society was magnified during the pandemic. We like
[Guest]: to say that, okay, we are all in this together. I do not believe that now having gone through
[Guest]: this, we are not all in it together in the same way for someone like me, who was privileged
[Guest]: and I did get a sense of my own privilege of being able to actually stay at home and
[Guest]: write a book during a pandemic. I mean, that's immense privilege. And someone else who is
[Guest]: basically having a difficult time making his or her living. That is that is definitely
[Guest]: something that got magnified. And the other pieces of I mentioned some of these things
[Guest]: in the book is that we tell people to wash their hands. But how can we tell someone who
[Guest]: doesn't have clean water how to wash their hands with soap? How can we tell someone who
[Guest]: lives in the slums to socially distance? So we have to make our society more equitable.
[Guest]: And that was for me, one of the other observations. And then finally, a lot of the things that
[Guest]: I saw that I feared would happen, and they did happen because of this, this sense of
[Guest]: mistrust in science and this, this society that where we have built where experts are
[Guest]: often vilified. And this happened to a great extent in the United States where I currently
[Guest]: live. But it happened elsewhere as well, where we were the science was way ahead of what
[Guest]: people were doing. But people were still dying because they were not taking simple measures.
[Guest]: I mean, wearing a mask became an ideological issue. That should be a public health matter.
[Guest]: And we can go on and on about that. But I think overall, it was a very, very humbling
[Guest]: experience for me to see that and to see the disparities. I mentioned a couple of examples
[Guest]: in the book. One of them is in the part on the impact where I was talking about a large
[Guest]: fraction of the world is not going to get basic immunizations for diseases like measles.
[Guest]: And on the other hand, there are privileged people in other parts of the world who are
[Guest]: using zoom and they don't like how they look on zoom. And they're going for plastic surgery.
[Guest]: So just by putting these two facts together, you can see the dichotomy in society. Or even
[Guest]: during the lockdown, we had people who travel for miles and they didn't even have any food,
[Guest]: they had nothing to eat. And on the other hand, we there are people who are surreptitiously
[Guest]: getting onto golf courses because they needed to get their 18 holes of golf in during the
[Guest]: pandemic. And so, yeah, it's just the scale of this was, was perhaps you don't see that
[Guest]: outside of a pandemic. But definitely it brought into sharp relief the divisions that we have
[Guest]: in our society. So it started off as a science book, it definitely didn't end that way. And
[Guest]: it's definitely changed me as well through the process of writing this.
[Amit Varma]: Wow, that's so fascinating. And I didn't know that people are getting plastic surgery, because
[Amit Varma]: of zoom. Like, you know, I haven't got a haircut in months, as you can see, but thankfully,
[Unknown]: the podcast is not a video thing. And that's something I've kind of been reflecting on
[Amit Varma]: as well. Like I've been extraordinarily fortunate during this pandemic to be able to do the
[Amit Varma]: things that I do to be able to you know, I've worked from home for 12-13 years. So it's
[Amit Varma]: not a big deal. Just shoot up my laptop, do what I do, it's completely okay. But especially
[Amit Varma]: in India, these differences are so stark. If you look at what happened to the migrant
[Amit Varma]: laborers, you know, they used to be stories during the partition that when trains from
[Amit Varma]: Pakistan would come into India, or vice versa, trains from India would go there, you know,
[Amit Varma]: the train would reach the final destination with everyone inside it dead because they
[Amit Varma]: had been killed. And I did an episode with Ruben Mascarenas on, you know, who did a lot
[Amit Varma]: of work feeding hungry people during the pandemic in Mumbai. And he spoke about how, you know,
[Amit Varma]: there were actually trains where they would put a migrant worker on a train and they would
[Amit Varma]: feed them in Mumbai, but everywhere else there's no one feeding them. And three days later,
[Amit Varma]: you know, the guy stumbles out on the platform wherever he is in his hometown and just dies,
[Amit Varma]: dies of starvation in in like the 21st century. So that's, that's just completely nuts. We
[Amit Varma]: will, of course, discuss a little bit more about the politics of it after the break.
[Amit Varma]: The other thing that I think the pandemic really made stark, especially in an Indian
[Amit Varma]: context is how dysfunctional our state is. The various ways, I mean, the state fundamentally
[Amit Varma]: in India, I've always said there is no rule of law for most people. The state is absent,
[Amit Varma]: it doesn't do any of the things that it should do properly and does a lot of things that
[Amit Varma]: it should not do at all. And we've seen an exacerbation of this. Like it's just coming
[Amit Varma]: to stark relief through the last few months. I've written a column on this, which I linked
[Amit Varma]: from the show notes. But it's kind of distressing that, you know, that in a sense, in this terrible
[Amit Varma]: tragedy, at least there are some things that we should be able to see more clearly, which
[Amit Varma]: should not immediately get normalized as this gets over. And these are these thoughts are
[Amit Varma]: too deep, we have to take a break. So we'll take a break and come back in a minute.
[Amit Varma]: Long before I was a podcaster, I was a writer. In fact, chances are that many of you first
[Amit Varma]: heard of me because of my blog India Uncut, which was active between 2003 and 2009, and
[Amit Varma]: became somewhat popular at the time. I love the freedom the form gave me. And I feel I
[Amit Varma]: was shaped by it in many ways. I exercise my writing muscle every day, and was forced
[Amit Varma]: to think about many different things because I wrote about many different things. Well,
[Amit Varma]: that phase in my life ended for various reasons. And now it is time to revive it. Only now
[Amit Varma]: I'm doing it through a newsletter. I have started the India Uncut newsletter at India
[Amit Varma]: uncut.substack.com where I will write regularly about whatever catches my fancy. I'll write
[Amit Varma]: about some of the themes I cover in this podcast and about much else. So please do head on
[Amit Varma]: over to India uncut.substack.com and subscribe. It is free. Once you sign up, each new installment
[Amit Varma]: that I write will land up in your email inbox, you don't need to go anywhere. So subscribe
[Amit Varma]: now for free. The India Uncut newsletter at India uncut.substack.com. Thank you.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome back to the scene and the unseen. I'm chatting with Anirban Mahapatra about
[Amit Varma]: his fabulous book on COVID-19. And let's actually now start talking about COVID-19. You know,
[Amit Varma]: in your book, I love the sequencing in your book where you have these 22 chapters, each
[Amit Varma]: of them is like a one word thing, you know what it's about, you go really systematically
[Amit Varma]: through all of the book. Let's let's kind of begin though with your chapter three, which
[Amit Varma]: kind of gets down to the most, you know, at a fundamental level talking about the virus
[Amit Varma]: itself or even chapter four, where you talk about how structure is related to function,
[Amit Varma]: which is something I randomly say in the case of content where it is certainly true, the
[Amit Varma]: structure of your content determines what your content actually is. But I was fascinated
[Amit Varma]: and almost blown away to find that it's like that in biology as well, that shape determines
[Amit Varma]: everything, you know, which is I was never taught that in school, not that I was particularly
[Amit Varma]: attentive in the biology class. Tell me a little bit more about that.
[Guest]: Yeah, I was not taught that at school either. And I mentioned that in the book that it's
[Guest]: one of the most fundamental concepts in biology and definitely one of the most mind blowing
[Guest]: aspects is, well, all biology is at a certain level chemistry and all chemistry if you go
[Guest]: down deeper is physics. And most of physics is is mathematics. But at the level of biological
[Guest]: molecules, when we have different biological molecules that perform different functions,
[Guest]: the shape determines often what the function of that molecule is. And by by shape, I mean,
[Guest]: the the the actual structure is is not static as well, the structure is changing over time.
[Guest]: And one of the examples that I use in the book that might be relevant for for someone
[Guest]: who's who's interested in COVID-19 is this example of now the infamous spike, which is
[Guest]: on the surface of the coronavirus and juts out and gives the virus this sun like appearance
[Guest]: and and how different changes to its actual shape are determining how well it infects
[Guest]: cells. So it has a complementary surface to the to the the ACE2 receptor, which has a
[Guest]: different function in the body. It's a it's a cellular receptor on on certain cells. But
[Guest]: what the virus is capable of doing is is using that to get its viral package inside cells.
[Guest]: Now one concept in this is that that I just mentioned is is the is the shape changes over
[Guest]: time what we have seen. So OK, so let me step back again. The shape of this is determined
[Guest]: by the building blocks. In in this case, it's a protein. So the building blocks are the
[Guest]: amino acids. As I mentioned earlier, there are typically 20 of these. So if we can think
[Guest]: of this as almost like a Lego set, and there are different pieces that are getting put
[Guest]: here, that's the same set is used by the virus. And it's the same set used by by humans. And
[Guest]: that is one of the unifying concepts across biology is that proteins. I mean, that's why
[Guest]: the the blueprint that determines this is called the universal genetic code, because
[Guest]: it's this this this blueprint of numbers. Sorry, it's this blueprint of letters. And
[Guest]: as I mentioned it, this gets translated into transcribed into this intermediate compound
[Guest]: and then get gets translated into this origami like three dimensional structure, which is
[Guest]: which is quite fascinating. But in the case of the coronavirus, what was observed was
[Guest]: the spike protein or parts of the spike protein were able to bind or attach because of the
[Guest]: complementarity of the shape and some of the chemistry were able to attach reasonably well
[Guest]: to the ACE2 receptor one part of it, which is the cognate part. So the part of the spike
[Guest]: protein that was binding is called the receptor binding domain and it was it was attaching
[Guest]: quite nicely and doing so at a way that was we can calculate that in terms of biochemical
[Guest]: parameters. It was doing that better than the original SARS, which as you may recall
[Guest]: was not as infectious. Now, what structural biologists, so this is entire field of biology
[Guest]: called structural biology. And what they do is they create structures of of various proteins
[Guest]: and other biological molecules and they use that structure to determine what the function
[Guest]: is and how that function might might change over time. Structural biologists were very
[Guest]: quick to determine the structure of the spike of SARS-CoV-2, the coronavirus. What they
[Guest]: had noticed that one part of this of this protein, which has a little bit over 1,300
[Guest]: different amino acids. So you can think about this as a three dimensional structure of or
[Guest]: over 1,300 amino acids. And what they noticed is that there was this one part of the cell
[Guest]: that was hanging out, let's say, as a hand. But on the other side, there was another piece
[Guest]: that was that was not fitting it or it was it was attaching to it, but almost not in
[Guest]: a perfect complementary manner. Now, what they had predicted at that time is that if
[Guest]: the other side was also like an open hand, then there would be a better touching point.
[Guest]: Remarkably, that was that is actually what has been observed for one of the variants.
[Guest]: So this is a case where structure and function are absolutely related, where the complementarity
[Guest]: of a structure on the on the receptor and a structure on the virus are so well attuned
[Guest]: through the process of evolution, that we have a variant now that is more infectious.
[Guest]: And what basically blows my mind is that we are looking at differences on the atomic level
[Guest]: of something, a virus that we cannot see is this nanoscale virus that has real world implications
[Guest]: for millions of people, billions of people around the world. So that is definitely one
[Guest]: of these cases. The other thing is that the immune responses. So right now, as we are
[Guest]: speaking, there's a lot of discussion about the variants and whether the vaccines will
[Guest]: work and whether people will get reinfected after they get infected by one of these variants,
[Guest]: particularly the one that came from Brazil and the other one that came from South Africa.
[Guest]: Those are the two of major concern right now. We don't know much about the one that is that
[Guest]: has come up in Maharashtra and and perhaps we will in the next few days. So what antibodies
[Guest]: do is they also use this concept of structure by trying to find the piece of the virus that
[Guest]: is attaching to the cell and getting there first because they attach better, getting
[Guest]: there first and blocking it, actually physically blocking it from attaching to the receptor.
[Guest]: And at one level, this is so visual and so beautiful, but this is not something that
[Guest]: we are we are taught in biology in class at all. We basically thought of it as a number
[Guest]: of or biology is taught as a series of facts that we have to memorize.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, no, I was I was so struck by the geometry of this. And correct me if I'm oversimplifying,
[Amit Varma]: but how it kind of struck me is that it's a little bit like a jigsaw puzzle. Everything
[Amit Varma]: has a different kind of shape. Yeah. And what the virus does is that it kind of, you know,
[Amit Varma]: mutates and mutates and then natural selection will, you know, throw up these random variants
[Amit Varma]: which fit perfectly. And, you know, then they fit perfectly and they can replicate. And
[Amit Varma]: so that kind of becomes much more common. And you know what antibodies do and what a
[Amit Varma]: lot of, you know, medical ways of fighting this is also at the level of geometry. Like
[Amit Varma]: if there is a spike that is fighting something, either you sort of create something that fits
[Amit Varma]: that spike first or you attack the spike or wherever the spike is fitting, you fit that
[Amit Varma]: with something else. So the spike has nowhere to go. I hope I'm not being too kind of simplistic,
[Amit Varma]: but this is such a sort of, you know, just thinking about the geometry of it and the
[Amit Varma]: way that you made it visual was so kind of fascinating. Let's, you know, take a step
[Amit Varma]: further back. What is a virus? You know, tell me a little bit about how we should because
[Amit Varma]: most lay people just know that, oh, there are germs and there are bacteria and there
[Amit Varma]: are viruses and it's like two different categories like Hindu, Muslim and, you know, and so but
[Amit Varma]: what are viruses? Where do they come from? I remember at one point, you've, you know,
[Amit Varma]: spoken in your chapter on the coronavirus on how before there were any living creatures,
[Amit Varma]: it was an RNA world, right, you know, and you've spoken about how viruses are the most
[Amit Varma]: successful biological entities, you know, another interesting sort of TIL for me there
[Amit Varma]: are, you write at one point, quote, even in the human body, there are probably 100 times
[Amit Varma]: as many viruses as there are human cells. So what are kind of viruses? Exactly? How
[Amit Varma]: do they interact with the human body? How do they evolve? How do they grow? What's the
[Amit Varma]: whole deal? What's the role that they play?
[Guest]: We can we can do a whole episode on this, but I'll try to keep this absolutely succinct.
[Guest]: Viruses are and they are obligate parasites in that they have functions that are similar
[Guest]: to living things once they're inside living things. So they absolutely have to get inside
[Guest]: other living, they have to get inside living cells to be able to replicate and by replicate,
[Guest]: I mean that they create new virus particles and that fulfills their prerogative from a
[Guest]: perspective of evolution of spreading. And so a virus just wants to spread and by saying
[Guest]: just wants to spread, maybe I'm treating it in a more, giving it a human-like property,
[Guest]: but that's not the case. This is just simply the biological prerogative or the biological
[Guest]: objective rather of the virus to spread. So outside of a body, a virus is very much like
[Guest]: a chemical. It is not living, it doesn't have that many living attributes, but within cells
[Guest]: it definitely has a lot of the hallmarks of living entities. And viruses may predate life,
[Guest]: that's definitely one of the theories. There are other theories, especially that have come
[Guest]: in the last few years from a certain class of viruses known as giant viruses that they
[Guest]: may actually be stripped down version or some of them at least may be stripped down versions
[Guest]: of cells. So for every living organism, starting from bacteria all the way up to humans and
[Guest]: definitely plants, there are viruses that infect them and can parasitize viruses. Not
[Guest]: all viruses are harmful and this is something that is definitely lost on a lot of people.
[Guest]: They are involved in biogeochemical cycles, especially in the water where there are a
[Guest]: large number of bacteria. And so viruses that infect bacteria are known as bacteriophages
[Guest]: and they are involved in a lot of the turnover in water. Scientists are now even looking
[Guest]: to viruses for therapeutic uses, in particular cases for bacteria that have become resistant
[Guest]: to a number of antibiotics by figuring out which viruses do this. And there's some really
[Guest]: exciting work that has come up on bacteriophage therapy in the last few years with respect
[Guest]: to that. Viruses are a huge class of biological entities. Some of them have RNA as their genetic
[Guest]: material and the coronaviruses are a category of viruses there. And then there are the DNA
[Guest]: viruses as well. The RNA viruses are particularly promiscuous. RNA is not a molecule that is
[Guest]: used as genetic material in living organisms because of certain reasons. DNA is better
[Guest]: suited for that, but it still stays on in certain viruses. And they have a very high
[Guest]: mutation rate, as people are now finding out with the coronavirus that we're looking at
[Guest]: right now and the disease that it's causing. Viruses have been infecting us since life
[Guest]: began. And there are traces of viruses in our own genetic code. Certain classes of viruses
[Guest]: which are known as retroviruses, they actually integrate into our genetic material. Now coronaviruses
[Guest]: are not retroviruses, so they're slightly different. So we actually have the archaeological
[Guest]: remains of viral infections in our own genetic material, and that's more than 8%. So even
[Guest]: if we disregard all the viruses that are inside our body, so we are also part virus because
[Guest]: of the viral genetic material we have in our genomes. One of my pet peeves actually to
[Guest]: go off on an aside is the synonymous use of genetic code with genome. They're slightly
[Guest]: different. So I wanted to get that right.
[Amit Varma]: This is fascinating because I'm so happy to find out that I no longer do I need to describe
[Amit Varma]: myself as half Punjabi, half Bengali. I'm actually 46% Punjabi, 46% Bengali and 8% virus.
[Amit Varma]: Now that you mentioned, what's the difference between a virus and a bacteria?
[Guest]: A bacteria is a cellular form of life. And so bacteria is living and it has all the hallmarks
[Guest]: of living organisms, whereas a virus outside of cells is not living. A bacteria may cause
[Guest]: infection, it may be free living as well. Viruses definitely have to infect to be able
[Guest]: to propagate and to create new viruses. And then the other aspect about is from a public
[Guest]: health perspective, antibiotics work against bacteria, but they don't work against viruses.
[Guest]: Antivirals are much fewer in number as we are painfully finding out during this coronavirus
[Guest]: pandemic. And that's definitely not the case with bacteria. So we have been doing a much
[Guest]: better job in controlling bacterial infections by and large, as opposed to new emerging viral
[Amit Varma]: infections.
[Amit Varma]: So here's the deal. So you've pointed out, you know, what viruses are and how they kind
[Amit Varma]: of there are so many of them. And you said that a virus needs to enter a cell to replicate.
[Amit Varma]: Tell me about this process of replication. Like let's say a virus figures out a way to
[Amit Varma]: enter a cell, which in the case of the coronavirus, which by the way, you've described the history
[Amit Varma]: in the book about why it's called a coronavirus is that when they first saw it, it sort of
[Amit Varma]: was a little bit like the corona of the sun. So they kind of went with that. So how does,
[Amit Varma]: you know, once a virus enters a cell, what is the process there? How does it replicate?
[Amit Varma]: What are the different components of that?
[Guest]: So one of the things about the virus actually getting in the cell is it's a random process.
[Guest]: Viruses don't have any way of propelling themselves. A lot of bacteria can do that. So through
[Guest]: random means, a virus will find a cell and it will find a receptor. And that's why viruses
[Guest]: often are in like these teeming large numbers. And as we discussed earlier, there are so
[Guest]: many different viruses. So we are probably ingesting through the air, as we're speaking
[Guest]: now, a number of viruses as well. But they're not causing disease because they have to be
[Guest]: able to find the specific receptor that they can recognize to be able to get inside. And
[Guest]: it's similarly with when I'm drinking tea or eating anything, there might be plant viruses
[Guest]: there. But over, even among the animal viruses, there are over 1.6 million predicted animal
[Guest]: viruses, but only a few are able to infect humans. Once they get inside cells, though,
[Guest]: their immediate job is to create the protein part of the cell, which is a structural part
[Guest]: of the additional virus particles, but also to replicate their genomes. And in the case
[Guest]: of the coronavirus, the genetic material is the RNA. And that serves both as the template.
[Guest]: So the beauty for the virus perspective, the beauty from the perspective of the virus is
[Guest]: that that can serve both as the blueprint for the creation of these other particles
[Guest]: that it will need as building blocks, but it's also the genetic material so it can make
[Guest]: copies of that. So it's making both the structure and the genetic material from this compound.
[Guest]: Now, one thing about the virus, though, is that the RNA viruses, they are, because they
[Guest]: don't use DNA as their genetic material, they have a different copier enzyme than we do.
[Guest]: And this is called the RNA dependent RNA polymerase. And part of that, or that, and that enzyme
[Guest]: is often used as a target for drugs because we don't have it in our body. One of the drugs
[Guest]: that has been used during this pandemic to stop the coronavirus infections, at least
[Guest]: early on, is remdesivir. And remdesivir, one of the modes of action that it's thought to
[Guest]: work is to stop this RNA dependent polymerase, this copier enzyme, from making future copies
[Guest]: of itself and being able to, being able to replicate. The virus also brings in a couple
[Guest]: of other enzymes of its own, and these are turning out to be targets as well. There are,
[Guest]: I mentioned, there's a, there's a class of enzyme called proteases. And these are basically,
[Guest]: they act as cleavers. And they cut at very specific sites when the entire protein is
[Guest]: created. So basically, it's like a large, almost like a large piece of cloth that has
[Guest]: to be cut at specific places to make designs. And those are going to be part of the building
[Guest]: blocks of the virus. So that's another target right now. And I know Pfizer right now has
[Guest]: a drug in, in phase one of clinical trials to, to hit those. So one of the ways of drug
[Guest]: discovery, as you mentioned, is that the structure determines what the drugs will be and using
[Guest]: that structure activity relationship to create drugs for these unique targets that are found
[Guest]: within the virus, but not within people. And so, and the reason for that is then there
[Guest]: will be less adverse effects. Once the virus particles or once the subunits of the virus
[Guest]: and the genetic material are made, then they're assembled within the cell. For this entire
[Guest]: process, the cellular machinery has been hijacked. So it's basically our cellular machinery that
[Guest]: is making the virus particles for themselves. And it uses a part of the cell as well to
[Guest]: be able to get outside as well. And this system is mostly used to get rid of cellular trash.
[Guest]: So it uses the trash compaction system. So it uses one system of receptors to get in,
[Guest]: then it completely subverts our cellular machinery to make the virus copies of itself. And then
[Guest]: it uses the trash compaction system to get out.
[Amit Varma]: That's beautiful. And I love the phrase trash compaction. You know, maybe it can be used
[Amit Varma]: one day in the context of the IT cell of certain parties. But so I kind of want to take a brief
[Amit Varma]: digression, not exactly a digression, because it's a point you mentioned in your book also,
[Amit Varma]: but I think it's worth stressing on for many lay readers. You know, one of the big sort
[Amit Varma]: of aha moments of my life, which really made me look at the world differently was when
[Amit Varma]: I discovered natural selection. Like Douglas Adams once said, you know, that there's no
[Amit Varma]: reason to believe in God, because if you just understand natural selection, the awe of what
[Amit Varma]: you experience is far beyond anything that any religion can give you. And you yourself
[Amit Varma]: here have quoted someone called Theodosius Dobzhansky, who writes, quote, nothing in
[Amit Varma]: biology makes sense except in the light of evolution. So at the risk of getting a little
[Amit Varma]: too simple, but just, you know, in case there are lay people listening to this who might
[Amit Varma]: be wondering that, hey, this is so incredibly complex that it's, you know, you've got a
[Amit Varma]: virus getting inside the cell, it's got this mechanism, it's got that mechanism, it's copying
[Amit Varma]: itself, RNA is happening, cell also has trash, trash compaction units, it's got an IT cell
[Amit Varma]: of its own. And all this, you know, humongous complex shit is happening, you know, surely
[Amit Varma]: there is God who designed this. And what do you mean when a virus wants to replicate?
[Amit Varma]: So I just want to take a brief moment to kind of talk about that, which I will do in my
[Amit Varma]: simple terms. And if I've missed out anything or missed a nuance, you can kind of fill in
[Amit Varma]: because I think, you know, understanding natural selection is just so key to understanding
[Amit Varma]: our world and life, which is basically that look, there are millions of viruses, they
[Amit Varma]: don't all fit into cells. And, you know, but they will all mutate in different ways. And
[Amit Varma]: accidentally, some will happen to fit into cells, and they'll get into the cells, right?
[Amit Varma]: Part one done. Now, out of all the ones that get in accidentally, you know, there will
[Amit Varma]: be a few that have the right properties to start one process. And out of all of those,
[Amit Varma]: there will be a few that will have the properties to start another process. And at the end of
[Amit Varma]: all of this, the ones that successfully replicate are the ones who were essentially formed by
[Amit Varma]: accident. But once they are, they replicate and then there are more and more of the viruses
[Amit Varma]: like that. So it almost seems like so when you say a virus wants to spread, that wanting
[Amit Varma]: is a metaphor. Yes. So you know, if anyone hasn't read Richard Dawkins's book, The Selfish
[Amit Varma]: Gene or a lot of his other work, Daniel Dennett as well, go out and kind of do that, because
[Amit Varma]: that will explain it much better than I can. But this whole process is so joyous, that
[Amit Varma]: is iteration, iteration, iteration, everything is accidental. But then something just works
[Amit Varma]: and multiplies. And you can ascribe directionality to this and say, hey, this was meant to be
[Amit Varma]: or you can, you know, ascribe intention to the virus, a virus wants to do this, the virus
[Amit Varma]: is a bad guy. And all of that, you know, understanding natural selection is so much the bedrock
[Amit Varma]: of this that I thought I should bring in this aside for people who like I once wasn't exposed
[Amit Varma]: to it and understand it. It's just it's always when I think about it, that how everything
[Amit Varma]: is emerged from it is so incredibly wonderful. So did I leave out anything essential in my
[Guest]: brief description? I think you you you hit the nail on the head with the importance of
[Guest]: evolution by natural selection, as you mentioned, I even included it in the book and had it
[Guest]: as part of a chapter on on concepts, because it is an absolutely essential concept to understanding
[Guest]: anything in biology, your description of it is accurate, I would say, one other piece
[Guest]: that I would definitely add is that there's always a selection pressure. That's what's
[Guest]: basically driving the selection of those changes. Because otherwise, somebody might say, well,
[Guest]: what is the designer, what is pushing it towards it becoming more infectious, and it's that
[Guest]: selection pressure. And then the other thing is that it's always happening because the
[Guest]: world is not static situations are changing all the time. And I would say that's the other
[Guest]: really, really beautiful thing about it is there is no static environment in the world
[Guest]: anywhere. And so what may seem like an organism getting an upper hand briefly, over time and
[Guest]: over 4 billion years of evolution, that doesn't seem to be the case at all. So I absolutely
[Guest]: love it. And everything I I try to understand in biology, I definitely try to understand
[Guest]: from the perspective of evolution by natural selection. And to those naysayers who doubt
[Guest]: it and don't understand what you mentioned, the repetitive or the iterative process of
[Guest]: natural selection, people are using it now. And there's Francis Arnold won a Nobel Prize,
[Guest]: and others have been using it as well, for actual benefit to be able to use the process
[Guest]: by having this repetitive process and the selective force to make proteins and other
[Guest]: macromolecules even better over time. And this is what is known as directed evolution.
[Guest]: And it's a definitely a force in biological engineering to use evolution as a force for
[Guest]: for creating molecules. So everything doesn't have to be rational. I guess that's my main
[Guest]: point is if you have a large number of molecules and you have this selection pressure, and
[Guest]: you give nature time, then over time, it will find a way to get through.
[Amit Varma]: So here's one question, which might also seem like a nice question. Now, there are all these
[Amit Varma]: tons of viruses, and some of them get successful in kind of propagating themselves. Now, I
[Amit Varma]: would think that logically, a virus doesn't actually have to harm the host. You know,
[Amit Varma]: it's like, which are the successful domestic animals are the dogs and cats and the ones
[Amit Varma]: that get along with us and, you know, perform different kinds of emotional functions for
[Amit Varma]: us, which are completely beneficial. If they weren't, they wouldn't be domestic animals.
[Amit Varma]: Similarly, you'd imagine that a virus to replicate successfully and to not have, you know, medicines
[Amit Varma]: targeted at it and all of that would be ones which would cause no harm to the host and
[Amit Varma]: they would just chill and the host would just keep spreading them and everybody's happy.
[Amit Varma]: It's a positive some game and so on and so forth. But so is it the case that there are
[Amit Varma]: many, many viruses and most of them are completely harmless and they spread like that. And there
[Amit Varma]: are only a few that are accidentally dangerous to hosts and it's not actually necessary for
[Amit Varma]: them to go back to the metaphor to harm the host. Or, you know, so what's going on here?
[Amit Varma]: What's the deal here? Why do they harm us? They don't need to harm us.
[Guest]: That's an absolutely fantastic question. I'm glad you asked that question. And you are
[Guest]: absolutely spot on that the essential aspect of the virus is not disease. Disease is important
[Guest]: to us from our perspective as someone who has been infected. The reason we care about
[Guest]: certain viruses is because they cause disease. I mean, you can think about this coronavirus
[Guest]: SARS-CoV-2. If it had gone through humans without causing any disease, then perhaps
[Guest]: we might have identified it by accident or perhaps not even at all. And we only think
[Guest]: about the viruses that tend to cause disease and more often serious disease. I wrote about
[Guest]: the previous pandemic when I was a managing editor. I wrote an editorial about H1N1 influenza
[Guest]: and that pandemic was not taken very seriously because it didn't cause severe disease. It
[Guest]: spread reasonably well, not as well as SARS-CoV-2, but it spread reasonably well, but it didn't
[Guest]: cause disease. Disease is an outcome of a virus spreading well, because if you remember
[Guest]: the process that we discussed, once the virus actually gets inside the cell, it uses up
[Guest]: some of the cell resources and the cell machinery. So if it is very successful in replicating,
[Guest]: then it causes harm to the cell. And so that is one of the primary outcomes. The secondary
[Guest]: outcome is often what we see as disease is not caused by the virus, but by our reaction
[Guest]: to the virus. And often in cases of COVID-19, that second phase of the dysregular or abnormal
[Guest]: immune response is what is causing harm in people. And that's why some people are receiving
[Guest]: dexamethasone as well towards that phase. And so if you are not able to mount the appropriate
[Guest]: immune response, not a too strong immune response, not too weak an immune response, if it's too
[Guest]: strong an immune response, what can happen is then the immune response is actually destroying
[Guest]: many of the cells and inside the body as well. And that is actually what is happening in
[Guest]: a number of cases of COVID-19, where the virus itself is not causing that damage. But it
[Guest]: is really a great question that you ask. Early on, what microbiologists thought was essentially
[Guest]: what you are saying, and you will still find some microbiologists who believe that over
[Guest]: the course of time, a virus will invariably grow weaker in terms of how it causes disease
[Guest]: as it gets more attuned to the host. And so what happens is with a zoonotic infection,
[Guest]: because it doesn't have that much of a quote unquote history with us, at that early time,
[Guest]: then it can cause more severe disease, but over time, it gets milder. However, new modeling
[Guest]: studies suggest that that may not be the case. And the reason for that is actually what is
[Guest]: playing out in real time with these variants, where it, as we just discussed, nothing is
[Guest]: static in biology. So it's not that there is one direction that it can go. For the virus,
[Guest]: the mathematical optimal situation is one where it is not a complete pushover. But it's
[Guest]: also not killing the host before it's able to spread to other people. So it has this
[Guest]: sort of range in the middle where it can settle in where it can cause some disease, even severe
[Guest]: disease in some people, but it's creating a lot more of a viral load that it can infect
[Guest]: other people. So the short answer is it's not as simple as even microbiologists thought
[Guest]: it was maybe 100 years ago.
[Amit Varma]: Wow. And by the way, you use the phrase zoonotic for the benefit of my listeners, that means
[Amit Varma]: a virus that comes from an animal to a human being. And we'll discuss that a little more,
[Amit Varma]: because I want to talk about bats also and murdered minks, which is makes me very sad.
[Amit Varma]: But before we get to that, I'm kind of curious about this point, you mentioned about the
[Amit Varma]: optimal virus, right? Because if you think of it in game theoretic terms, and you think
[Amit Varma]: of, you know, somebody creating viruses and is a great game theorist, what do you do?
[Amit Varma]: And what you don't want to do is create something like Ebola. Now, Ebola is very lethal. It
[Amit Varma]: kills a large percentage of the people who get it, but it doesn't spread that easily.
[Amit Varma]: It is not a symptomatic spread. And you know, once you know someone's really ill, they can
[Amit Varma]: get isolated. Whereas, so you want a virus that spreads a lot equally, you want it all
[Amit Varma]: you want a certain amount of lethality. If it kills nobody, it's really like what is
[Amit Varma]: a virus even doing so that your evil virus designer is not successful there. So it seems
[Amit Varma]: that you need a certain sort of level of infectiousness and a certain level of lethality. And your
[Amit Varma]: ideal virus should be something that is spread by asymptomatic people. And even people who
[Amit Varma]: don't have severe symptoms who don't realize what's going on and the lethality comes later.
[Amit Varma]: So you are killing a certain percentage of the people but not too many, because then
[Amit Varma]: it doesn't spread that well. Is it fair to say that SARS-CoV-2 or the you know, this
[Amit Varma]: COVID-19 virus basically is as close to optimal as possible?
[Guest]: There are certain aspects of SARS-CoV-2 that make it also very difficult to deal with compared
[Guest]: to a number of other viruses. And definitely the way that it's spread makes it primed for
[Guest]: a pandemic because it's a respiratory virus. And because with other things like there have
[Guest]: been pandemics in the past that have been caused by cholera, but cholera has been mainly
[Guest]: eradicated from many countries. And we can choose to not drink the same type of water.
[Guest]: We can definitely choose to not eat the same kind of meat or even the same food. But we
[Guest]: all have to breathe the same air. I mean, we can filter it to a certain extent. But
[Guest]: that's one of the reasons, the fact that it's a respiratory virus. And then a lot of the
[Guest]: spread is asymptomatic, as you mentioned. And a lot of the infectiousness is during
[Guest]: that early phase of asymptomatic. That silent spread is happening in a number of people
[Guest]: who are carriers that make it very difficult to control as well. But even among the viruses,
[Guest]: you hit on a really great point. But even among the viruses, you mentioned Ebola. Ebola,
[Guest]: because it kills the people that it infects, it has to have a massive viral load. It is
[Guest]: basically teeming and coming out of every orifice of the person who is infected. And
[Guest]: even when the person dies, the World Health Organization has been saying, you have to
[Guest]: be very careful about how you perform the last rites of these bodies. Because often,
[Guest]: what happens with Ebola is that it is a disease that spread through love, through caregivers
[Guest]: who want to take care of those who are ill, and who want to give the last rites to others.
[Guest]: Because it spreads in such massive numbers. On the other hand, there are other viruses
[Guest]: that cause these type of chronic and latent infections. And they don't need those large
[Guest]: numbers and they don't need to cause disease immediately. And definitely, HIV is one of
[Guest]: them. The virus that causes hepatitis is another one of them. And so in most people, they can
[Guest]: be sort of causing no disease at all and asymptomatic. And most people won't even know about it.
[Guest]: And they can even linger in people for years before they have a type of disease. And so
[Guest]: in those cases, based on what you were saying, and just on a rational idea of what would
[Guest]: be necessary, you can envisage that the number of viruses needed to infect and that do infect
[Guest]: is much less than in a case of Ebola, which has a very short infectious cycle and very
[Guest]: acute infection versus these other chronic infections.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, I'm struck by a phrase you just used. And it strikes me that then what is common
[Amit Varma]: between both humanity and Ebola is that they are diseases that spread through love. I love
[Amit Varma]: that phrase. And I had done an episode a few weeks back with Chinmay Tumbe about the pandemics
[Amit Varma]: India has been struck by and that has a lot about cholera as well. And it's it's so fascinating
[Amit Varma]: to sort of see that all this has played out before, you know, at least the bad parts of
[Amit Varma]: it has played out before we have never had, you know, so many vaccines within a year.
[Amit Varma]: And the kind of science work that is happening is sort of remarkable. So a follow on question
[Amit Varma]: from there that assuming that this is kind of close to optimal, that it is both infectious
[Amit Varma]: and lethal, I would have thought that just logically, like, where is the flaw in my thinking
[Amit Varma]: that, you know, that logically it would like many viruses have done of the past also, including,
[Amit Varma]: I think, influenza strains, that it would naturally evolve towards becoming more infectious
[Amit Varma]: and less lethal. Because, you know, that would seem to be the natural consequence. It seems
[Amit Varma]: kind of counterintuitive that it can become both more infectious and more lethal or even
[Amit Varma]: as lethal. So what are we seeing right now? Like here we are actually talking in April.
[Amit Varma]: And obviously, your book is actually remarkably up to date, given when it came out that it
[Amit Varma]: talks about all the vaccines and the British variant and all that. But what we are seeing,
[Amit Varma]: for example, right now in India, it would seem just looking at the raw numbers and it's
[Amit Varma]: evolving. So the whole picture could look different five days from now, and I have no
[Amit Varma]: way of telling. But just from a layman's perspective, just looking at sort of the data, it seems
[Amit Varma]: that cases have gone up massively, but the death rate hasn't quite gone up to the same
[Amit Varma]: extent. Is it possible that it is a strain that is more infectious and less lethal, which,
[Amit Varma]: I mean, you would kind of expect? Or, you know, are there nuances here? Are there other
[Amit Varma]: possibilities that we and obviously, I realized that nobody knows right now, we are still
[Amit Varma]: in a sense in the fog of war. But what's your kind of take on that?
[Guest]: Yeah, that's definitely one aspect of it is over time, what can happen is the virus can
[Guest]: become more infectious and less lethal. But the other side of it is your immune response.
[Guest]: So let's say you get vaccinated, or you get infected, or you have an asymptomatic infection
[Guest]: that you don't know about, you may have antibodies and you may have T cell responses, that when
[Guest]: you have that second reinfection, it's not as severe anymore. So there are these two
[Guest]: sets of factors that are determining what that is. And maybe in a number of people,
[Guest]: they didn't know that they were infected the first time. And in those cases, they are actually
[Guest]: having reinfections. The point that you made about previous pandemics is actually quite
[Guest]: a good one. And with H1N1, which happened in 1918 and 1919, because that was such a
[Guest]: deadly and dominant virus. One thing is that every single virus, even the ones that circulate
[Guest]: within human populations right now, and then cause seasonal influenza, apart from the ones
[Guest]: that are causing bird flu and are not transmitting very well, and they just come every few years
[Guest]: with different variants. But all of the circulating influenza A strains right now, are in some
[Guest]: manner derived from that H1N1 of 1918 and 1919. And there is a theory, it isn't very
[Guest]: well substantiated, that one of the human coronaviruses, there are human coronaviruses
[Guest]: that cause colds, may have caused a pandemic in the 1800s. And then it just became very,
[Guest]: very mild over time. What we are seeing now with SARS-CoV-2, it's still too early right
[Guest]: now. And a large proportion of the world has not even been infected once. So we will know
[Guest]: this. And that is actually how the pandemic ends. The pandemic doesn't end because SARS-CoV-2
[Guest]: gets eradicated. It ends because either through vaccination or either through different variants,
[Guest]: it becomes into a mild disease that we no longer have to worry about anymore.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, exactly. And as you also pointed out in your book that, you know, unlike, say,
[Amit Varma]: the way we eradicated smallpox, that is simply not possible with SARS-CoV-2, because it is
[Amit Varma]: not only humans who have the virus. Other animals also have it. You've written at one
[Amit Varma]: point in your book about how 600,000 minks were culled last June in Netherlands by suffocation.
[Guest]: Like, how, how were they suffocated?
[Guest]: So the issue here is, and this has been observed for...
[Amit Varma]: No, I'm not asking why, I'm saying how, like you put them in a gas chamber or you take
[Guest]: one mink at a time and you suffocate it.
[Amit Varma]: No, I have no idea what they did there.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, it's kind of striking. Let's talk a little bit about the origins. Like, you know,
[Amit Varma]: earlier you used the phrase zoonotic and zoonosis, of course, is viruses coming from animals
[Amit Varma]: to humans, as indeed they do. And most of the time they won't even enter our cells and
[Amit Varma]: most of the time when they do, nothing will really go wrong. So we won't even notice it.
[Amit Varma]: So this is kind of a selection bias that we give viruses a bad name by picking on the
[Amit Varma]: ones that actually do serious damage to us. What do we know about the origins of the Corona
[Amit Varma]: virus? Like in the sense that, you know, you've spoken about how, you know, what we took seriously
[Amit Varma]: earlier was the influenza virus, which is 1918 and the Hong Kong flu in the late 60s
[Amit Varma]: and the mid 50s and whatever. So you've had the flu virus around a long time that also
[Amit Varma]: uses RNA replication, but you've pointed out that there are some differences and no one
[Amit Varma]: really took Corona viruses seriously. Perhaps when the first SARS came, which you said,
[Amit Varma]: you know, at that point you were active in the profession and you kind of thought about
[Amit Varma]: it and wrote about it. That's when people started taking it seriously. What, you know,
[Amit Varma]: how are Corona viruses different from say the influenza virus? You know, how do they
[Amit Varma]: originate? What's the whole deal? And how did this particular, how did SARS-CoV-2, what
[Amit Varma]: are the theories about the origin and how it kind of reached humans?
[Guest]: Yeah, as I mentioned, there are a certain number of, there are four Corona viruses that
[Guest]: cause common colds in humans. Two of them were discovered a few decades ago and nobody
[Guest]: really paid that much attention to Corona viruses. There was a perspective in science
[Guest]: that I mentioned in the book with respect to a scientific meeting where the total number
[Guest]: of people attending a meeting on Corona viruses could not fill an entire room. They were like
[Guest]: empty seats. There were so many empty seats. There were so few people at that time working
[Guest]: on Corona viruses. And this was before SARS basically hit the scene. And so Corona virology
[Guest]: at that time was considered one of the backwaters of virology. There weren't that many people
[Guest]: working on this obscure class of viruses. And obviously after that, what happened is
[Guest]: the first SARS pandemic happened in the first part of this century. And SARS spread to a
[Guest]: number of other countries. It was fairly lethal. It was much more lethal in general than the
[Guest]: current Corona virus, SARS-CoV-2. But as we were discussing, because many of the people
[Guest]: or actually most of the people who were spreading the disease, most of the people who spread
[Guest]: the virus did so after they were showing signs of disease, it was much easier to isolate
[Guest]: it. So there weren't that many silent infections. And after a while, in the summer, the disease
[Guest]: basically died down. It hasn't been eradicated. It could pop up at any time, but officially
[Guest]: there hasn't been an outbreak. And then after that Middle East Respiratory Syndrome or MERS
[Guest]: first appeared in cannibals in the Middle East, that one also like SARS is thought to
[Guest]: have originally originated from bats. Now bats for some unknown reason, and I have some
[Guest]: theories in the book, as it might pertain to flight and the stresses and strains of
[Guest]: flights in bats. Bats are mammals that do fly, harbour a disproportionate number of
[Guest]: Corona viruses that don't cause any severe disease in them. And so MERS definitely spread
[Guest]: from camels to people. It was very deadly, but it was not very infectious. And so with
[Guest]: respect to the current Corona virus, SARS-CoV-2, the original reservoir animal is almost certainly
[Guest]: a bat. Now whether it came directly from bats many years ago, and then went through the
[Guest]: process of mutation to become more infectious is one theory. And that may have happened
[Guest]: over a few decades where it wasn't causing a very severe infection, wasn't causing very
[Guest]: severe disease, and then it wasn't infecting very well, but it gained some mutations because
[Guest]: of the natural selection pressures that we mentioned, and then it exploded at one time.
[Guest]: That is definitely a plausible theory, and that is in line with what we're seeing with
[Guest]: some of the variants as well. That happens quite frequently. The other thing about Corona
[Guest]: viruses is that two Corona viruses can infect a cell at the same time. Influenza viruses
[Guest]: do this as well, but their genetic material is actually broken into pieces. So when they
[Guest]: enter a cell, they can actually mix and match pieces and create a totally new virus. Corona
[Guest]: virus is not broken into pieces, but it can take parts from other viruses, other Corona
[Guest]: viruses that infect the same cell. So very early on, there was this theory that there
[Guest]: was an intermediate pangolin host. So a pangolin had been infected by a bat Corona virus, and
[Guest]: so a pangolin and a bat Corona virus entered the same cell. They mixed and matched pieces,
[Guest]: and one of the parts of the current Corona virus is very, very similar to a pangolin
[Guest]: Corona virus, and that's the part that's useful or essential for binding to the receptor.
[Guest]: That's the receptor binding domain. And so that theory has also been put out there, and
[Guest]: definitely an intermediate animal has precedent in what is thought to have happened with the
[Guest]: original SARS, with civets being thought to be the original, civets thought to be the
[Guest]: intermediate animal in that case. So which of these two theories is correct is not known
[Guest]: at the time. Formally, I know a lot of people like this theory, formally we cannot still
[Guest]: rule out that there was a viral escape from any lab, but viral manipulation or manipulation
[Guest]: is, does not have to be, I mean, going by Occam's razor, that's not the simplest answer.
[Guest]: And when we see that we are infected by these viruses, then it does happen naturally. And
[Guest]: there are a large number of Corona viruses in bats. And even before this pandemic, there
[Guest]: were scientists like Vineet Menachery and Ralph Baric who were saying that there are
[Guest]: Corona viruses we need to look at and watch out for because they can infect human cells.
[Guest]: With all of these lines of evidence, I don't think at the present, we need to entertain
[Guest]: the idea that this was created in a lab in Wuhan.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah. And at some level, it doesn't really, I mean, at a geopolitical level, it may matter
[Amit Varma]: or whatever, but you know, at the level of biology, it is what it is, it's out there.
[Amit Varma]: And you pointed out that, you know, there are more than 5000 known bat Corona viruses,
[Amit Varma]: which is so incredibly scary. Any random one can mutate and do something and come to humans
[Amit Varma]: and do something far worse. And as far as pangolins are concerned, I like this is one
[Amit Varma]: of my favorite names for a living creature. It's like, you know, Middle Eastern martial
[Amit Varma]: arts warrior, you know, you can make a graphic novel on the pangolins fighting for the survival
[Amit Varma]: of the species. No, actually, pangolins are scaly anteaters. And yeah, so somehow bats
[Amit Varma]: and pangolins partied and this is and earlier, you know, you mentioned RNA as being much
[Amit Varma]: more promiscuous than DNA, at which point I thought that in India, then DNA would be
[Amit Varma]: looked upon as much more sanskari than RNA, which is merrily mixing all over the place,
[Amit Varma]: which is by the way, what we indeed used to do in India until, you know, a while back,
[Amit Varma]: Tony Joseph's book and his episode with me has much more. So now, what I kind of find
[Amit Varma]: interesting about it and where this current outbreak in a sense has come at the right
[Amit Varma]: time, like I think that if it came 40 years ago, we would have no idea what to do with
[Amit Varma]: it. It could have been you could argue it would be less devastating because global travel
[Amit Varma]: was less and therefore it may not have proliferated so fast. But there would have been some point
[Amit Varma]: in time where global travel would have been you know, frequent enough for a big enough
[Amit Varma]: for it to spread fast, but the science wouldn't have gotten to where it was. And this time
[Amit Varma]: what you've sort of spoken about is that in January itself, we had sort of the genetic
[Amit Varma]: sequence of, you know, SARS-CoV-2 and already people began working on a vaccine as far back
[Amit Varma]: as then, which is one of the reasons that it's kind of come so far. So tell me about
[Amit Varma]: what happens to the scientific community? What happened to the scientific community
[Amit Varma]: last year when this sort of erupted? Because like you said earlier, you wouldn't fill a
[Amit Varma]: room with people studying the coronavirus. And now it's just an existential threat to
[Amit Varma]: all of us. So everybody's kind of on it. So what is the kind of research happening there?
[Amit Varma]: You know, is it a kind of, you know, a fortuitous moment in time that a lot of other developments
[Amit Varma]: have come together at a time where we can actually handle this, we sort of can figure
[Amit Varma]: out a way ahead. Tell me what's happening in the science now, like you also pointed
[Amit Varma]: out about how, you know, by the end of 2020, there were like 1000s of papers on coronavirus
[Amit Varma]: just proliferating all over the place, so much productive work kind of happening on
[Amit Varma]: this, which can, you know, show benefits down the line for future pandemics, or even understanding
[Amit Varma]: our biology a little better in general. So give me a sense of what's been happening in
[Amit Varma]: the science since this was discovered.
[Guest]: Yeah, some of this was happening. You are absolutely right that it was in many ways
[Guest]: fortuitous that it happened when it did happen, even I would say, as opposed to five years
[Guest]: ago, I wouldn't even go back 40 years, I would say even, even five years ago, or 10 years
[Guest]: ago, or 20 years ago, we have to think about when when HIV first started infecting, or
[Guest]: when HIV became a major cause of AIDS in the 80s, and was spreading all across the world
[Guest]: at that time, it took many years for the genomes to be sequenced. At that time, there was no
[Guest]: RT-PCR diagnostic test. And then if we flash forward from that to even SARS, which was
[Guest]: when I was doing my PhD, at that time, it took months to get the sequence of a genome.
[Guest]: And now we can get genome sequences very quickly. And that has been part of what has been done
[Guest]: with this genomic surveillance. It is scary that we are finding variants, but we are finding
[Guest]: variants because we are able to look for variants, and we're able to sequence hundreds of 1000s
[Guest]: of genomes fairly quickly. We would not have known about that in the past. So, so the science
[Guest]: at that level, and that's because of, of next generation sequencing, and the both the cost
[Guest]: of that has gone down, and the speed and accuracy of that is, is just mind blowing from that
[Guest]: respect. With respect to vaccines, also, the platforms that are available now with all
[Guest]: the molecular platforms and the RNA platform, a number of things had to happen to be able
[Guest]: to make the RNA stable and to be able to deliver that because RNA is a fairly unstable molecule.
[Guest]: And to be able to deliver that and the seminal papers happened just a few years before this
[Guest]: mRNA vaccine came out for or these two mRNA vaccines, the Pfizer one and the Moderna one
[Guest]: came out last year and were shown to have fantastic efficacy. And so, again, I mentioned
[Guest]: the history of that and that was definitely a perfect storm of that. One other aspect
[Guest]: of this is we were just talking about the structural biology, but the spike protein
[Guest]: was the structure of the spike protein was determined very, very quickly because there
[Guest]: were a couple of labs, Jason McClellan being one, who had identified the structure of the
[Guest]: MERS coronavirus spike protein. And he used a very ingenious technique of basically stapling
[Guest]: it with two molecules, two building blocks, which are known as prolines. So he used two
[Guest]: prolines to be able to stabilize it and and he knew that trick. And that trick was utilized
[Guest]: in the design of three of the vaccines that seemed to be working very well, the Pfizer,
[Guest]: the Moderna and the J&J vaccine. So all of these things happened. Most people are not
[Guest]: aware of them and perhaps they don't need to be aware of them. But you are absolutely
[Guest]: right. And now that these platforms have been shown to work, that we know that we can go
[Guest]: through trials in such a rapid manner, they will be used for other viruses and for other
[Guest]: infectious diseases. But also the pace by which these booster shots can now be created
[Guest]: for any variants of concern is also quite spectacular. And that's definitely on the
[Guest]: scientific front. On the non-scientific front, just the technology that has advanced over
[Guest]: the past few years, and has allowed us to work from home and even have this conversation,
[Guest]: this didn't exist, the Wi-Fi, the broadband, none of this existed, even 10 years ago at
[Guest]: the level that people could work from home in large numbers. And then finally, I will
[Guest]: point out the information on the internet where people can actually look at cases in
[Guest]: their own area. And information can sometimes be paralyzing, but I always feel that it's
[Guest]: better to know than the alternative and then to be ignorant. And to be able to see the
[Guest]: cases in the area, the measures that are being taken in real time. This is the first pandemic
[Guest]: of that, of the flattening the curve, so as to speak. And all of these things happened
[Guest]: at this time, it would not have been possible in any previous pandemic.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, it's so stunning. And I couldn't agree with you more about, you know, that even this
[Amit Varma]: conversation would not have been possible 10 years ago, we may not have known of each
[Amit Varma]: other. You know, you may never have written the book because who knows, you know, to sort
[Amit Varma]: of just be asked by a publisher who's looking at your tweets and saying, huh, this guy knows
[Amit Varma]: what he's talking about. So it's quite remarkable. But it's also a thought that, you know, as
[Amit Varma]: you mentioned earlier, that not everybody has this. I mean, if you just for example,
[Amit Varma]: you know, we take the internet so much for granted, the people in Kashmir went so many
[Amit Varma]: months without it, you know, and for us, it's like oxygen, we can't imagine life without
[Amit Varma]: it. At one point in this book, you talk about how these viruses that cause respiratory diseases
[Amit Varma]: are a problem, because you said, I think I'm quoting from memory here, quote, breathing
[Amit Varma]: is not optional, stop quote. And in a similar sense, I think for many of us who are now
[Amit Varma]: used to it and take it for granted, the internet is something like that. Before I kind of move
[Amit Varma]: on to my next question, I also want to sort of, you know, you mentioned the structure
[Amit Varma]: again, another line that I was struck by from the book about what the virus does about,
[Amit Varma]: you know, the way it's looking to fit into a cell is that at one point, you wrote, quote,
[Amit Varma]: a virus is like a thief going from one house to another with one key, trying to see what
[Amit Varma]: it can open with it, stop quote, which is a stunning line, like, you know, I'm going
[Amit Varma]: to, you know, show this to my writing students as an example of show don't tell about how,
[Amit Varma]: you know, just with one visual, you make so much so clear. And at another point, another
[Amit Varma]: line of yours that I loved, was when you talk about how we can't make out the colour of
[Amit Varma]: the virus, and contrary to the popular depictions of it, which is red and all that. And you
[Amit Varma]: say, quote, SARS-CoV-2 does not look like a lychee, stop quote. So all this is, you
[Amit Varma]: know, and the book is full of stuff like this. So for anyone who's listening, you know, just
[Amit Varma]: kind of pick up the book, you'll read it in one sitting and hopefully, you know, gift
[Amit Varma]: it to all your friends, because everyone needs to know this stuff. So my next question is
[Amit Varma]: about what does this virus do within the body? Because even that some someplace where our
[Amit Varma]: knowledge has been evolving, and perhaps the virus has also been evolving, but our knowledge
[Amit Varma]: has been evolving, like, it's not just a respiratory thing. It's, you know, it does so many different
[Amit Varma]: things it, you know, the symptoms are, can be different, they can be respiratory, they
[Amit Varma]: can be fever, they can be gastrointestinal, where it, like you pointed out, it attaches
[Amit Varma]: to the, you know, ACE2 receptors within those particular tracts. And it causes blood clotting.
[Amit Varma]: And sometimes a virus doesn't kill you, the immune system does with, you know, what are
[Amit Varma]: called cytokine storms, which you also described and explained so well in your book. Give me
[Amit Varma]: a picture of what happens, you know, what are the different things that the virus does
[Amit Varma]: within the body? And what are those things which, you know, make it so much more lethal,
[Amit Varma]: and so much more something we should worry about than some of the previous sort of viruses
[Guest]: of this sort?
[Guest]: Yeah, so in a lot of asymptomatic people, and those who have very, very mild infection,
[Guest]: the extent of the virus spread is basically the nose and the upper respiratory tract.
[Guest]: And they are still infectious, because when they are sneezing, when they are breathing,
[Guest]: those virus particles, at least in the early part of the infection, they are, they are,
[Guest]: they're coming out from their nose and their mouth and their throat. After a while, the
[Guest]: virus though, it goes in certain people. So that may be the extent of infection in a lot
[Guest]: of people who are spreading the disease. In other people, though, then the virus goes
[Guest]: down into into the delicate parts of the lungs, and then infects there. And that's when the
[Guest]: disease starts to get more severe. And we have people who need oxygen, sometimes ventilation
[Guest]: as well. And from that point, once it goes down there, and then the immune response starts
[Guest]: with the hyperactive immune response, and the cytokine storms, that's when it becomes
[Guest]: almost a battle. And then from there, the virus can go through the bloodstream and infect
[Guest]: other parts of the body as well. And this is sort of has been a moving target. At first,
[Guest]: everyone, as you mentioned, thought it was a respiratory virus. But now it's known to
[Guest]: infect various other parts of the body as well. It's been definitely found, even in
[Guest]: the nervous system. And, and even it's thought to be found in parts of the brain, and is
[Guest]: responsible for this aspect of long COVID now, which is also referred to as post COVID
[Guest]: syndrome, in which people are having mental effects of this. In addition to the the loss
[Guest]: of smell that's happening, there are GI tract disturbances, as well in a number of people.
[Guest]: Early on, it was thought that it was spread a lot through through fecal matter. That does
[Guest]: not seem to be the case. Early on, it was thought to be spread a lot through surfaces
[Guest]: and surface contamination. That now is thought to be minor and surface cleaning and decontamination
[Guest]: does not have to be as much as it is before. But basically, you are right, it can in the
[Guest]: first stage, it's in the upper part of the respiratory tract, then it goes down to the
[Guest]: lower part of the respiratory tract. And then there is this, this hyper immune response stage
[Guest]: as well, that that happens in people. And because of this, because it's such a moving
[Guest]: target, there is no single drug that is a magic bullet. Because in the early part of
[Guest]: the stage, what you're trying to do is you're trying to stop viral replication. But later
[Guest]: on, you're actually trying to slow down your immune response. You don't want to slow down
[Guest]: your immune response at the first part of the infection, because then it might get to
[Guest]: become more life threatening as well. And then what happens is if you use a lot of the
[Guest]: antivirals towards the last part of the last part of the disease, then it's it's not as
[Guest]: effective anymore, either. Most antivirals work very well in the early part of the infection.
[Amit Varma]: You know, one of the things that I noticed about the policy response was that the policy
[Amit Varma]: response initially consisted mostly of blunt tools, you know, like lockdown and like whatever.
[Amit Varma]: And we'll come back to that later. And part of that is just state capacity, both intellectual
[Amit Varma]: capacity and your actual manpower and all that. But, you know, if we move away from
[Amit Varma]: policy to the scientific response, one, there has been some remarkable science happening
[Amit Varma]: in all these really different vaccines coming out. And we'll discuss that in detail as well.
[Amit Varma]: But as far as the treatment is concerned, it seems that what was thrown at the disease
[Amit Varma]: to begin with, were blunt tools in the sense that they were things that might have worked
[Amit Varma]: in the past for, you know, other viruses, or I think remdesivir was tried during Ebola
[Amit Varma]: and didn't really work even there. And there are, you know, even though everyone in India
[Amit Varma]: is talking about shortage of it, it's still, you know, trials haven't really shown that
[Amit Varma]: it even works. There still seems to be this massive fog, people have tried drugs of the
[Amit Varma]: past, people have thrown all kinds of quackery at the problem. What's been the reason for
[Amit Varma]: that, that when science quickly figured out structure, and, you know, genetic code, and
[Amit Varma]: all of that, all of those things, and came out with all these incredible vaccines, why
[Amit Varma]: is it so difficult to treat when it actually gets going? And what are the sort of the different
[Amit Varma]: methods that have been tried and that haven't worked? And, and here, it seems that it is
[Amit Varma]: almost like science in the battlefield. It's not like you're doing science in a lab, you're
[Amit Varma]: doing science in a battlefield where every day, you know, medics are also coping with
[Amit Varma]: the pressure of trying to figure a way out this, this shit then gets politicized. Because
[Amit Varma]: if Trump says hydroxychloroquine is the answer, then everyone, you know, gets on that bandwagon.
[Amit Varma]: Where is the science on it? Why is this aspect, you know, so difficult?
[Guest]: And that's one thing that I worry about as well is that when the next pandemic strikes,
[Guest]: if it is a respiratory virus, if we don't have a medicine cabinet of drugs, if we don't
[Guest]: have a way to develop vaccines very quickly, if we don't have pan coronavirus vaccines
[Guest]: and pan influenza vaccines in the future, then we will be stuck with a similar situation
[Guest]: just like this, where the tools at the start of the pandemic are very blunt instruments,
[Guest]: such as the measures that were taken during 1918 and 1919. And even before that, with
[Guest]: lockdowns and quarantines and school closures and, and businesses closures and masks and
[Guest]: things like that. They are effective, but you are absolutely right. They are not very
[Guest]: precise tools. They are very blunt instruments. And part of that is that it takes really a
[Guest]: long time to develop drugs longer than to develop vaccines. Vaccines can use these platforms
[Guest]: and they can, they can be created in at least what we noticed in this case, they can be
[Guest]: created in a shorter amount of time. So all the drugs that we have for this were repurposed
[Guest]: from previous diseases and for other, other outcomes and they're used as other treatments.
[Guest]: And so what we have here is that drugs that were not designed for this particular virus.
[Guest]: So we know all the structure, we know what the function is. And now we are at the stage
[Guest]: that a number of these drugs are in phase one and some of them are, I believe are in
[Guest]: phase two as well, where they will be available. So, but you can see it's taken over a year
[Guest]: and in pandemic terms, that is not acceptable as, as far as I see it. So we do need to build
[Guest]: up a set of other broadly applicable or broadly usable drugs for future pandemics that, that
[Guest]: target some of these specific targets that we know to be existing for RNA viruses. The
[Guest]: problem with that, and I've mentioned this elsewhere is, is a lot of the incentives and
[Guest]: a lot of the economic aspects of creating a drug where it takes a few hundred million
[Guest]: dollars to actually get a drug. And it takes many years to go through and run the entire
[Guest]: gauntlet of trials to get the drugs out there. But when there isn't a pandemic, there is
[Guest]: no demand for that drug. So there, you cannot price the drug to actually even recoup your
[Guest]: costs. So I think the description of this that's been used, and I like it a lot, is
[Guest]: that no one really values the fire extinguisher until there's a fire. So how are you going
[Guest]: to price that fire extinguisher? How are you actually going to go through the research
[Guest]: and development process to make that? And my hope is that now with this pandemic, people
[Guest]: will see this as a serious threat to human populations in the future, and there will
[Guest]: be public investment. I think there has to be a certain level of public investment in
[Guest]: many of these drugs for the future. And so when the next pandemic invariably hits, we
[Guest]: will be better prepared to respond with drugs at the outset.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, no, that's a great point. The incentives problem is massive. And it's something that
[Amit Varma]: I've also addressed in my past episodes, that if you think back at a politician, say, 10
[Amit Varma]: years ago, you know, if he spends a ton of money preparing for something that does not
[Amit Varma]: happen, you know, there's so many other things he could do with that money, there's so much
[Amit Varma]: opportunity cost, how do you even and politicians have short lifespans in terms of there is
[Amit Varma]: always the electoral cycle, they're always looking at the next election. So spend the
[Amit Varma]: money on something that will help them get those votes, rather than, you know, spend
[Amit Varma]: on the unseen, you know, preventing a pandemic, because if you if you're too successful, no,
[Amit Varma]: you know, people will think, hey, why did he kind of do all that spending, and hopefully
[Amit Varma]: this pandemic will sort of be like a reality check and push for more of that. So it's not
[Amit Varma]: so bad the next time around. Tell me now about the vaccines, because I remember, you know,
[Amit Varma]: up till a few months ago, you had, you know, scientists and doctors and all of that going
[Amit Varma]: on air and saying entirely plausibly, that listen, there has never been a vaccine for
[Amit Varma]: any Coronavirus. For example, though, you've pointed out in your book that in animals that
[Amit Varma]: has but I think, but not in none of the ones that affect humans, that scientists have been
[Amit Varma]: trying for decades to find a vaccine for HIV, and they haven't succeeded, we may never have
[Amit Varma]: a vaccine. And, and now we have so many vaccines, and they're all so different. And they're
[Amit Varma]: all remarkable. And you know, with the mRNA ones, it seems like they're kind of, you know,
[Amit Varma]: designed on a computer. It's just like miraculous. Take me a little bit, I mean, you know, share
[Amit Varma]: a little bit of the wonder of what has just happened, and which I think most normal people
[Amit Varma]: just don't get that what a freaking miracle it is almost.
[Guest]: Yeah, and they were partly designed on a computer and they worked really well. And definitely,
[Guest]: so I have a friend who works for one of the major vaccine manufacturers for the mRNA vaccine.
[Guest]: And he and I converse quite a bit on Twitter, he, he reviewed a certain number of chapters
[Guest]: of this book. And we were just talking about it the other day that even I don't think anyone
[Guest]: expected the those vaccines to work as well as they did. If you recall, the initial efficacy
[Guest]: target was anything above 50% efficacy will be approved if it and the the endpoint that
[Guest]: they use was because they wanted to lessen the severity of disease and hospitalizations
[Guest]: and death was was basically symptomatic COVID-19 and severe disease. But now if you tell anyone
[Guest]: you have to take a 50% efficacy vaccine, nobody will take it. Everyone is talking about even
[Guest]: AstraZeneca, which has been remarkably successful in in halting the number of cases in the UK
[Guest]: and saying I don't want to take that vaccine because there are now vaccines with with 95%
[Guest]: efficacy that that have been created. And in this case, this has happened because the
[Guest]: spike protein was relatively a soft target for for the immune system and in terms of
[Guest]: the antibodies and the T cell responses that were possible. With the case of HIV, HIV is
[Guest]: so elusive. If you think about the variants that we have, you can think about HIV as variants
[Guest]: times a million or even times a few few million in that you're not actually looking at even
[Guest]: one one virus that you can create as a certain set of immune responses to you're you're looking
[Guest]: at a whole galaxy of viruses under that HIV umbrella. So in this case, we were quite lucky
[Guest]: in that there was basically, essentially one virus. And we were also lucky that when the
[Guest]: predominant strain changed, there was one mutant that became predominant in the middle
[Guest]: of 2020. Most people didn't care about it because it wasn't that much more infectious
[Guest]: and all the vaccines seem to work against it. We definitely got quite lucky, although
[Guest]: it remains to be seen now like how long that immunity lasts for. It could be anywhere from
[Guest]: I suspect it would be in the order of at least a year. But I think scientists are saying
[Amit Varma]: it could be anywhere from eight months to two years.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah. And there's a striking quote in your chapter on vaccines where, you know, right
[Amit Varma]: at the end, you say, quote, vaccines don't save lives. Vaccinations save lives, stop
[Amit Varma]: quote. And this again, you know, takes a focus away from the science purely to everything
[Amit Varma]: else that is happening. And you said earlier in this episode that, you know, the science
[Amit Varma]: is the easiest part of many problems to solve. You know, there's all this other stuff that
[Amit Varma]: is happening. Like we've seen, you know, in the course of the last year, how much things
[Amit Varma]: get politicised, you know, the wearing of masks almost became an ideological issue,
[Amit Varma]: you know, and all of that. And you know, once you take a stand, you harden down on the stand
[Amit Varma]: and then it's, you know, you've got your own narrative going on. And that's all that matters.
[Amit Varma]: So as a scientist, just looking at how the response has been and how, you know, everything's
[Amit Varma]: panned out, what are your kind of feelings on what is happening? Like, is it a sense
[Amit Varma]: of that look, you know, science could have progressed much more, but fine, these are
[Amit Varma]: setbacks, but at least we are progressing. Or is it do you sometimes feel like what is
[Amit Varma]: even the point when you look at all this nonsense that's happening in the real world, all this
[Amit Varma]: incredible politics where we now know, you know, we are in the second wave in India,
[Amit Varma]: and you've got these large public gatherings, you know, happening all over the place. And
[Amit Varma]: in your book, of course, you've, you know, in past pandemics, and in your book, I think
[Amit Varma]: you've mentioned a couple of them. We know what the large gatherings do, you know, I
[Amit Varma]: think you mentioned cholera, and Chinmay may have mentioned in his book cholera during
[Amit Varma]: the Kumbh Mela, or even during the Hajj, just so that we don't seem to be picking on one
[Amit Varma]: particular community, you know, so what does kind of one do about all that? What are your
[Guest]: feelings on this?
[Guest]: It is incredibly frustrating to see this. And I saw this play out over the course of
[Guest]: the last year. And in an over, over time, as I've lived in the United States, you here
[Guest]: you have this country, which in terms of the scientific output, and in terms of scientific
[Guest]: and medical advances, is definitely one of the countries at the forefront. And you see
[Guest]: this in terms of the research, the guidance, even the CDC plan, they had a pandemic preparedness
[Guest]: plan for just this kind of situation. And then on the other hand, you see this, this
[Guest]: subset of people, who regardless of what is presented to them, live in this post truth
[Guest]: world where ideology dictates what they believe, and that has real world and, and consequences
[Guest]: on people's lives. I mean, at this time 550,000 people have died in this country of a largely
[Guest]: preventable disease. I'm not saying that, that people would not have died. But so many
[Guest]: people did not have to die in this country. And that definitely is infuriating. And from
[Guest]: that perspective, I will say yes, that it is a failing of society in general. And maybe
[Guest]: we don't inculcate enough critical thinking, or maybe we don't, we don't see things from
[Guest]: the perspective of the broader holistic view. And we're thinking more in terms of our group
[Guest]: and our community and our own selfish needs and our desires and beliefs. But that is something
[Guest]: that definitely will need to be solved. And I think in 2021, one of the big issues of
[Guest]: this year is going to be around vaccination. Inequality definitely plays a part with some
[Guest]: countries having received very few doses of the vaccine. And those might be breeding grounds
[Guest]: for future variants as well. But even within India, you see like this dichotomy right now
[Guest]: of people, a lot of people, mainly urban, mainly educated, mainly middle class to upper
[Guest]: middle class or even rich, who want vaccines and are now queuing up and demanding that
[Guest]: they receive vaccines. And a large number of people who are unaware of what these vaccines
[Guest]: might do to prevent severe disease, who have somehow, who are somehow under this notion
[Guest]: that this, this pandemic is not really a big deal or wasn't even a big deal. They don't
[Guest]: see these variants as causing any future disease and are really more scared of the vaccines
[Guest]: than they are of the, of the disease, of the virus and of the variants. And so I see this
[Guest]: as a communications breakdown to both sets of people. I mean, the communications have
[Guest]: to be different to both groups of people. You have to communicate and have outreach
[Guest]: to people to convince them to take the vaccine. And in that case, it can be sort of a heavy
[Guest]: handed way of pushing people or, or, or lathi charging them and forcing them to take vaccines
[Guest]: or even financial incentives always tend to backfire because people think that there is
[Guest]: something wrong with the vaccine. That's why I'm getting paid to get the jab. So that's,
[Guest]: that's the type of outreach that, that definitely hasn't happened to that extent. And then the
[Guest]: other outreach of having a clear and consistent vaccine policy as to when people will be receiving
[Guest]: vaccines for those people who actually want them right now. And, and yeah, I mean, it's
[Amit Varma]: definitely a mess.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah. I mean, I've heard so many crazy things about vaccine that I like, I don't even know
[Amit Varma]: how to respond. Like one person I know said that they might as well put boiled water in
[Amit Varma]: the vaccine. It doesn't make a difference. Another person said that the vaccines are
[Amit Varma]: causing the second wave. A third person said that the reason the second wave is happening
[Amit Varma]: is because the money bags behind the vaccines want you to get the vaccine. So you have these
[Amit Varma]: ridiculous sort of theories going around. Now, another thing I want to kind of explore
[Amit Varma]: and it's something that I've been thinking about is how differently a public policy people
[Amit Varma]: on the one hand and scientists on the other hand may explore the question of truth and
[Amit Varma]: evidence. For example, you know, for a lot of public policy, there is no definitive evidence
[Amit Varma]: because you can't do a controlled experiment. Like my friend Shruti Rajgopalan once sort
[Amit Varma]: of gave a great analogy. She said that imagine that you want to find out whether dropping
[Amit Varma]: a coin in water displaces water or not, right? Does the water level go up or down? Simple
[Amit Varma]: enough to do. Now in a lab, obviously you can just take two beakers and put the coin
[Amit Varma]: in one of them and you can measure it and everything is controlled. But imagine doing
[Amit Varma]: it in a swimming pool where you put the coin in the swimming pool and you try to see what's
[Amit Varma]: happening. And there is no way of getting a meaningful result. And there are just so
[Amit Varma]: many other factors, so many variables that come into play. And you don't know counterfactuals
[Amit Varma]: either. You know, now I see this that, you know, a public policy people may therefore
[Amit Varma]: come from an ideological lens. And you know, and it's really interesting how the ideological
[Amit Varma]: lens affects how people look at certain measures like lockdowns. So people on the right over
[Amit Varma]: here because Modiji did the lockdown, were with the lockdown. But in the US, it was just
[Amit Varma]: the opposite where because Trump did not want a lockdown, they were like, you know, we don't
[Amit Varma]: need a lockdown and all of that. Now the thing with a lockdown is that you can never actually
[Amit Varma]: get evidence, evidence on whether it worked or not. You simply don't know the counterfactuals.
[Amit Varma]: Forget every country being different from each other. Every district is different from
[Amit Varma]: each other. Bandra is different from Andheri. You cannot possibly do a controlled experiment
[Amit Varma]: or have any sense of whether something worked or not. So in public policy, you're handling
[Amit Varma]: all these variables. In science, you're not. Now, what I see is that both of these sort
[Amit Varma]: of lenses of looking, which are perfectly valid lenses in their specific fields, that
[Amit Varma]: a public policy person always has to believe that even if the evidence appears to be for
[Amit Varma]: him, it may not be. Correlation may not be causation. There are so many other factors
[Amit Varma]: involved. Nothing is definite. But taking this lens to science becomes a huge problem
[Amit Varma]: and vice versa. That if science people are always, you know, that what works, what doesn't
[Amit Varma]: work, we want a clear answer. There has to be a clear answer. There has to be a way to
[Amit Varma]: design a clear answer that wouldn't work. Now, one example of the former kind where,
[Amit Varma]: you know, people within politics or policy take that sort of lens where the truth is
[Amit Varma]: kind of up for grabs and it's a narrative that matters that can really affect the response.
[Amit Varma]: Like just a couple of days ago, our Health Minister Harsh Vardhan said something about
[Amit Varma]: homeopathy must be encouraged and the Ministry of Ayush. And I've written about them in the
[Amit Varma]: past. Even in your book, you talk about, for example, how so many people don't get the
[Amit Varma]: importance of double blind, randomized control trials. And it's not just that people think
[Amit Varma]: homeopathy works because of the placebo effect. They also think it works because, and like
[Amit Varma]: you've pointed out in your book and I've written about it in columns in the past, that many
[Amit Varma]: diseases will just revert to the mean, that you'll be bad, you'll be bad for a while and
[Amit Varma]: then you get better and people will ascribe that and give credit to the medicine and all
[Amit Varma]: of that. And once they believe in a particular medicinal system, it almost becomes an ideological
[Amit Varma]: thing. And then the confirmation bias kicks in. And when it appears to work, they'll be
[Amit Varma]: like, wow. And when it doesn't work, they'll be like, whatever, it could have been worse.
[Amit Varma]: And all this shit happens. So but the fundamental question is about these conflicting mindsets,
[Amit Varma]: where some people take the mindset to science, where they don't realize that there are definite
[Amit Varma]: truths out there. And all science is a quest to get closer and closer to that you never
[Amit Varma]: absolutely know everything. And similarly, there can be an attitude, which is not a science
[Amit Varma]: attitude, more an engineering attitude, perhaps, where, you know, that where people will believe
[Amit Varma]: that all society can be fixed from the top down, and we can find the right answer for
[Amit Varma]: everything. Is this something that you've thought about or noticed?
[Guest]: I have and I think you expressed some of the limitations of each of these approaches. Each
[Guest]: of these approaches quite succinctly, definitely with respect to drugs and the confirmation
[Guest]: bias, but that applies to anything that we look at. Retrospectively, we can look at previous
[Guest]: pandemics and say, okay, this is we should have prepared for this, because something
[Guest]: in this pandemic was is very similar to this. And we can say, no, this pandemic is absolutely
[Guest]: different from every other pandemic, because these other additional aspects are different.
[Guest]: So we will, the observer will find out what he or she seeks and confirm that bias with
[Guest]: any type of retrospective analysis. With any type of forward looking analysis with a very
[Guest]: heterogeneous and large system with so many variables and unknowns, basically stochastic
[Guest]: processes, it becomes extremely, extremely difficult. I think the keys here are to basically
[Guest]: before the experiment is to set what the objectives are. If you're going to institute a lockdown,
[Guest]: what is the objective that you want for that lockdown? And you can't change that or shift
[Guest]: the goalpost halfway through or not make that clear. That has to be absolutely transparent
[Guest]: for any public policy initiative. And that has to be known to the public as well, to
[Guest]: get their buy in to get their involvement in that as well. And once they know the threat
[Guest]: of the disease, what the goals of that public policy outcome are. And then so in that sense,
[Guest]: pragmatically, if you take an approach, and things don't turn out as badly as the model,
[Guest]: then that's good. And why it exactly happened is not necessarily relevant. I mean, there's
[Guest]: a parable involving the Buddha and it says, basically, there was someone who had been
[Guest]: struck with an arrow. And when the person is struck with an arrow, he wants that arrow
[Guest]: removed and he wants to get better. So all the processes of how that happens and why
[Guest]: that happens that can come at a later date. That does not necessarily appeal to me as
[Guest]: a scientist, where I always feel uncomfortable with not knowing. And I always feel that there
[Guest]: are too many uncertainties around that. And I saw that when the pandemic curve, the epidemic
[Guest]: curve went down for India, and everyone was saying, well, the pandemic is over. And I
[Guest]: said, well, it will take time to figure this out to tease out why this happened. And we
[Guest]: cannot say that it happened because of any one favorite reason or any one favorite hypothesis
[Guest]: until we figure it out. Because the exact opposite reason can contribute to a resurgence
[Guest]: as well. And now we've seen a resurgence and there are many conflicting reasons as to why
[Guest]: it happened. It could be any one of them, it could be all of them. But again, that will
[Guest]: take time. So science sometimes takes as you mentioned, it takes time to figure out answers.
[Guest]: And in that sort of fog of war, we don't have time to tease out what those answers might
[Guest]: be. In that case, so what do we do? I think there are some models that we can apply. Now,
[Guest]: as George Box said, all models are wrong, but some models are useful. So we have to
[Guest]: figure out which model is actually useful for the parameter that we want. And again,
[Guest]: as he said, all models are wrong, because a model is inherently based on the parameters
[Guest]: of that model, and, and the the variables and the constraints that you impose upon it.
[Guest]: And it has to be for something as large and and as, as drawn out as this, it has to be
[Guest]: extremely reductionist. It can only have a few variables. Otherwise, we're going to,
[Guest]: but in the real world is is very full of chaos and of instances like the butterfly effect.
[Guest]: So we don't know what, what changes early on determine and that's the case even with
[Guest]: the trajectory of a pandemic. We don't know what could have stopped the pandemic early
[Guest]: on when it hit the scene in Wuhan. And were there things that could have been done at
[Guest]: that time that could have changed the trajectory of the pandemic. So certain events definitely
[Guest]: play a part in that. And no model can can account for that. So I have thought of that.
[Guest]: And I that's why I give you this, this long winded rambling answer that doesn't really
[Guest]: get to answering it properly.
[Amit Varma]: Oh, it's a lovely answer. And sometimes, you know, just asking the right questions and
[Amit Varma]: teasing out the question is more important than finding an answer. And by the way, for
[Amit Varma]: the many, many, many, many fashion model friends I have, I wish to validate your existence
[Amit Varma]: and say that some of you are useful. And, you know, getting back to what you said about
[Amit Varma]: the butterfly effect and chaos theory, and sometimes we don't know, and it strikes me
[Amit Varma]: that these words we don't know, are actually so important for so many of us to internalize.
[Amit Varma]: We are always so desperate to tell stories to ourselves, or, you know, get stories from
[Amit Varma]: elsewhere, which explain everything, and everything can't quite be explained. So in this context,
[Amit Varma]: before I get to my next question, I want to read out a great quote by Douglas Adams, which
[Amit Varma]: I love. This is Douglas Adams quote, imagine a puddle waking up one morning and thinking,
[Amit Varma]: this is an interesting world I find myself in, an interesting hole I find myself in fits
[Amit Varma]: me rather neatly, doesn't it? In fact, it fits me staggeringly well, must have been
[Amit Varma]: made to have me in it. Now the puddle stop quote, Adams continues, this is such a powerful
[Amit Varma]: idea that as the sun rises in the sky, and the air heats up, and as gradually the puddle
[Amit Varma]: gets smaller and smaller, is still frantically hanging on to the notion that everything's
[Amit Varma]: going to be all right, because this world was meant to have a minute was built to have
[Amit Varma]: a minute. So the moment he disappears, catches him rather by surprise. I think this may be
[Amit Varma]: something that we need to be on the watch out for. And my question goes back to, you
[Amit Varma]: know, something we discussed earlier in another context, which is humility. And here, it's
[Amit Varma]: humility about our species, that we tend to believe that we are masters of the universe,
[Amit Varma]: we have sorted everything out. I have heard elsewhere that we are basically colonized
[Amit Varma]: by bacteria, bacteria are the masters of the universe. In a different context, you could
[Amit Varma]: say that hey, viruses were possibly there before and they rule the roost and everything
[Amit Varma]: is contingent, existence is contingent. And everything is so fragile. And if anything
[Amit Varma]: over the last year, we should have got a greater sense of that and therefore developed more
[Amit Varma]: humility and perhaps a compassion that comes with more humility. And so what, and it seems
[Amit Varma]: to me that scientists would have the closest view of this, because you guys actually, you
[Amit Varma]: know, every day confronting all those, all these miracles of nature, and realizing how
[Amit Varma]: small a place, you know, we play in the universe. What are your sort of thoughts on this?
[Guest]: I agree with you completely. I am constantly, I'm constantly amazed by how long humans live,
[Guest]: considering the amount of abuse we put on our bodies through our entire lives, and how
[Guest]: much we disrespect ourselves and all the things that we do. I mean, life itself is absolutely
[Guest]: fascinating for me. And what you said definitely resonates with me, it strikes a chord. And
[Guest]: this is where I disagree with some other experts like Harari, who wrote in Homo Deus, that
[Guest]: there is this arc of progress where humans will continue to progress. But as you mentioned,
[Guest]: a lot of it is just like so much dependent on random events. Our species could have been
[Guest]: wiped out so many times in the past. And there are these pieces of evidence now that you
[Guest]: can look at from a scientific perspective. And I think Tony Joseph, whose book you mentioned,
[Guest]: he mentions a certain number of them. But there are others as well, where humanity could
[Guest]: have been wiped out at any moment in the past, as when we were, when our ancestors were in
[Guest]: Africa, when they were coming out of Africa. And even more recently, during the Cold War,
[Guest]: when we were at the brink of mutual destruction between the superpowers, the world could have
[Guest]: ended at that point. And just the fact that it didn't end doesn't mean that it had to
[Guest]: be that way, as you so eloquently said, using that puddle analogy.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, no, the eloquence was Douglas Adams's, not mine. And in fact, if you think about
[Amit Varma]: it, you know, the law of truly large numbers tells you that the universe will end one day,
[Amit Varma]: it is incredibly inevitable. I mean, the law of truly large numbers, by the way, is different
[Amit Varma]: from the law of large numbers. For my listeners, the law of truly large numbers says that if
[Amit Varma]: there are enough iterations of something, then no matter how unlikely the you know,
[Amit Varma]: the unlikeliest event is inevitable to take place, if there are enough iterations. I once
[Amit Varma]: wrote a column on this in the context of poker, where the I think the headline of the column
[Amit Varma]: was in unlikely is inevitable, that if you understand the law of truly large numbers,
[Amit Varma]: you realize that you can't take anything for granted. There's so much luck in everything.
[Amit Varma]: So you know, I've taken a lot of your time. And what I had actually planned to do was
[Amit Varma]: talk about each chapter of your book one by one. But now I realized that that'll take
[Amit Varma]: another five or six hours, because there are such, such depth to the book. So we won't
[Amit Varma]: do that. So I'll just ask kind of a couple of general questions before we end. And the
[Amit Varma]: first of the general questions is this, that how will this impact on medical sciences done
[Amit Varma]: in future going ahead? Because like, is this sort of an inflection point for where maybe
[Amit Varma]: in terms of focus on how we do things differently, or maybe just in terms of how a lot of the
[Amit Varma]: other science, like, you know, understanding genetics, like even AI and medicine, which
[Amit Varma]: Eric Topol has written about so much, how were we at a turning point anyway? And has
[Amit Varma]: this accelerated the turning point? Moving ahead? What can we expect? Like one of the
[Amit Varma]: things that I keep hearing about, and I wonder what your much more informed view on that
[Amit Varma]: would be, is about how one day we can stop aging or reverse aging, which sounds wonderful
[Amit Varma]: to me, because, you know, I was happier being young than middle aged, but I'd rather not
[Amit Varma]: be old. What are your views on that? And in general, going forward, you know, what's the
[Amit Varma]: state medical sciences in and, you know, do you think we'll be better prepared for the
[Guest]: next pandemic? I definitely hope that we are better prepared for the next pandemic. And
[Guest]: I think, at least with certain aspects, people will be more quick to, if it is a respiratory
[Guest]: virus than to wear masks and to socially distance. We certainly understand the parlance, we everyone
[Guest]: knows a lot more about viruses than they did a year ago. And I think that's definitely
[Guest]: a positive science is moving at breakneck speed, there is a lot more funding and realization
[Guest]: in the world. One of the things that we noticed is that, again, maybe it's a confirmation
[Guest]: bias on my part, but some of the countries that dealt with the first wave of the virus
[Guest]: were ones that were not prepared during the SARS epidemic a few years ago. So their populations
[Guest]: were very quick to wear masks, and were more compliant of some of the measures that were
[Guest]: taken. Whether or not that there's a sort of a causal relationship there, I don't know.
[Guest]: But that's just a very interesting observation. With respect to science and aging, that's
[Guest]: a fantastic topic and one that I've been looking at myself as populations age over time. And
[Guest]: it's something that we can go on about is basically around the 1800s onwards, we have
[Guest]: added, most of the world has added about three decades to our lives, through basic hygiene,
[Guest]: through antibiotics, and through modern medicine now. And now so we can see most of us will
[Guest]: be able to see our children grow up, most of our children will survive into adulthood
[Guest]: and see some of our grandchildren as well, which was not possible for most of humanity
[Guest]: during our history. I don't think most people realize what an amazing achievement that is
[Guest]: to be able to do that within less than 150 years. Now the next milestone is increasing
[Guest]: that and making sure that people not only live longer, but actually have a very good
[Guest]: health span where they are healthy during most of their life. And so that was actually
[Guest]: been a Faustian bargain in the sense that most of the world does not worry about diseases
[Guest]: that cause infant mortality and infectious diseases. But on the other hand, there are
[Guest]: diseases now of progressively older people that are becoming more prevalent, like heart
[Guest]: disease, cancer, Alzheimer's, Parkinsonism, that are affecting the quality of life. So
[Guest]: if you live longer, at one point, everyone has to die, and they have to die of something.
[Guest]: If you live longer, the diseases that you will die of are different than the diseases
[Guest]: then you would have died of perhaps 150 or 200 years ago. What will happen in terms of
[Guest]: society and how society responds once the pandemic is over is much, much harder to predict.
[Guest]: On the one hand, I am hopeful that people will take infectious diseases more seriously.
[Guest]: There will be more interest in science and in medicine. But on the other hand, I am also
[Guest]: disheartened by the fact that even when certain countries are seeing that the pandemic is
[Guest]: raging on in other parts of the world, where millions of people are infected and thousands
[Guest]: of people are dying, they are immediately eager to move on and to just say that that's
[Guest]: not my problem. And that sort of lack of foresight is not going to help us when we deal with
[Guest]: a number of the major problems that face humanity right now. And I say right now because they
[Guest]: are staring at us in the face in the next 10, 20 years. We are at the tipping point
[Guest]: of climate change, deforestation, extinction of species. The indiscriminate use of antibiotics
[Guest]: is going to cause a resurgence of antibiotic resistant superbugs. And all of this is happening
[Guest]: right now. And they will require a longer term focus and more investment in science.
[Guest]: But it depends on, I'm an optimistic person, but it depends on the day and what I'm seeing
[Guest]: in the world around me. I'm not convinced that people take problems that are not immediate
[Guest]: as seriously as they should.
[Amit Varma]: So these are very wise and eloquent words. I mean, next time we do a podcast, we should
[Amit Varma]: do a 10 hour episode because there is so much to discuss.
[Guest]: No, I really enjoy talking with you because you're asking questions in a way, not just
[Guest]: the questions, but in a way that you're actually half answering them. And I really like that.
[Guest]: There's a story by Sheckley, who's a science fiction writer, and it's basically a machine
[Guest]: that knows the answer to everything. And this machine has been created, but the machine
[Guest]: cannot solve any problems or provide any answers because to be able to do that, the questions
[Guest]: have to be formulated in such a way that part of the answer is actually known. And I felt
[Guest]: that having this discussion with you is just, we were just so much on the same wavelength
[Guest]: and we were hitting a lot of the answers.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you so much. I'm not done, by the way, in case you think it's over. My final question
[Amit Varma]: is to come. But my observation before my final question is about what you pointed out about,
[Amit Varma]: you know, I asked a question about the state of the science after the pandemic and you
[Amit Varma]: spoke about the state of society after the pandemic. And I think that's a fantastic subject
[Amit Varma]: to think about. And it's like one of the things that I think has happened and it's not a good
[Amit Varma]: sign is that the relationship between the society and the state has shifted to kind
[Amit Varma]: of favour the state over this period of time where, you know, the state is asserting more
[Amit Varma]: and more of its control. You see random rent seeking happening over things like whether
[Amit Varma]: people are wearing a mask when sitting alone in a car, you see more of state control, more
[Amit Varma]: authoritarianism, you know, and one wonders whether, you know, freedoms taken away never
[Amit Varma]: kind of get, you know, it never gets rolled back, it never comes back. So one has to sort
[Amit Varma]: of think about that. But here's my last question that, you know, where we are sitting in April,
[Amit Varma]: we are still kind of in a fog of war. And your brilliant book, which I hope everyone
[Amit Varma]: listening to this reads will kind of give us a certain foundation of understanding about
[Amit Varma]: everything that is happening. But beyond that, even having read the book, there are still
[Amit Varma]: so many questions I have and questions that people have in general, such as that what
[Amit Varma]: exactly is happening, you know, the second wave and it's just going on and on, when is
[Amit Varma]: it going to end? What are the dangers? What is long COVID? Will the new normal after everything
[Amit Varma]: settles down be different from what life was like before? And also how should we live?
[Amit Varma]: Which is, you know, a deep question in terms of broader philosophical and ethical this
[Amit Varma]: thing, but just in this context, just in the context of COVID that, you know, we now know
[Amit Varma]: that a lot of the washing of hands and all of that is a little bit of security theatre
[Amit Varma]: because it doesn't really spread through surfaces. And, you know, even the temperature thing,
[Amit Varma]: you know, fever is not necessarily a ubiquitous symptom. It's not even that common, but perhaps
[Amit Varma]: it's okay. I don't really mind harmless bits of security theatre and all of that. But if
[Amit Varma]: you had to advise people on that broader question that look, COVID is not over. COVID is not
[Amit Varma]: 2020. It's very much 2021. It's still here with us. And like you said, we'll have to
[Amit Varma]: live with it forever, perhaps in hopefully in much milder forms and with our bodies better
[Amit Varma]: prepared for it and all of that, maybe, you know, whether an annual vaccine like the flu
[Amit Varma]: vaccine in some places or whatever. But in general, what would you say that there's still
[Amit Varma]: a lot of confusion about this? What advice would you give the non-scientist lay person
[Amit Varma]: like me, who is just wondering that, hey, you know, what is happening and how long and
[Guest]: what must we do to, you know, going forward? Yeah, I would say my first thing to say right
[Guest]: now is don't worry too much. There are things in with aspects of unknown that we have to
[Guest]: be able to deal with this uncertainty. And we have to be able to deal with this uncertainty
[Guest]: over time and worrying does not change what is beyond our control as individuals and as
[Guest]: participants in society. We have to think about the things that we can do, both in terms
[Guest]: of changing our society and being valuable contributors to our society, not just in the
[Guest]: public health realm, but beyond that in what you were saying about ensuring our liberties
[Guest]: as well. Beyond that, I would say definitely get vaccinated when your opportunity comes.
[Guest]: The vaccines will provide protection. You may be worried about how they do against variants.
[Guest]: But again, science takes time. The vaccines are here now. They offer you some protection.
[Guest]: If it is not adequate protection, then there will be booster shots, then you will take
[Guest]: the booster shots. And so this is an ongoing thing. But you cannot, like you were mentioning
[Guest]: Chess, it doesn't help to think about the end game all the time. Just think about maybe
[Guest]: the next few moves and then we'll work out what the what the end game is. The variants
[Guest]: are definitely contributing to the pandemic in various parts of the world and the resurgence.
[Guest]: And based on what has been happening in India, we don't have the genomic data to say it with
[Guest]: certainty. But I would say it's very, very likely that the various pandemics are causing
[Guest]: this or are partly responsible for this new wave. And then people are obviously loosening
[Guest]: their measures. There's another theory that people may be staying more indoors because
[Guest]: of the warmer months. I don't know how much of these individually contribute to that.
[Guest]: But I mean, the cases are real. The disease is real. It is serious. And long COVID, as
[Guest]: we talked about, is something that is happening and it is real. So protect yourself. Hope
[Guest]: for the best. Get vaccinated. The same measures that you were using in the past will be the
[Guest]: same measures that will work for the variants as well. It's not a different virus. So conceptually,
[Guest]: I had mentioned that you can think of people as virus factories as they're breathing out
[Guest]: viruses in the book. So what you can think about with a variant as a very sort of simple
[Guest]: analogy is that people are still virus factories. They're breathing out perhaps more viruses
[Guest]: and perhaps fewer viruses need to enter your body to cause that level of disease as before.
[Guest]: There might be more viral load and the infectious dose might be less. There could be other factors
[Guest]: as well. But again, to simplify that, those are probably a certain number of factors that
[Guest]: are involved in making some of the variants more infectious. But if you see that as well,
[Guest]: you can see that the measures that you are taking, such as wearing masks and socially
[Guest]: distancing and limiting activities indoors will continue to be important. And then the
[Guest]: broader question about life, that is definitely a philosophical one. And I think we always
[Guest]: have to get back to the social aspects of this and the inequalities that we have been
[Guest]: seeing all around the world. And we saw this even with HIV. And I mentioned this even at
[Guest]: the end of the book, that the pandemic doesn't end when it ends only for us. And my fear
[Guest]: and worry is that even when it has ended for us and we are vaccinated and we're protected
[Guest]: that COVID-19 becomes a disease of the underprivileged, of a disease of poverty, disease of certain
[Guest]: parts of the world where it lingers on as a serious disease while we go on with our
[Guest]: business.
[Amit Varma]: Wise words again. And I must clarify here to my listeners that when Anirban is saying
[Amit Varma]: limit indoor activity, he does not mean have all your sex in the park. What he basically
[Amit Varma]: means is that, listen, we know that the spread of the virus really happens indoors. It's
[Amit Varma]: much less outdoors. It really happens indoors, especially in air-conditioned spaces. So be
[Amit Varma]: careful of social gatherings and all of that, especially the current virus with the infectious
[Amit Varma]: levels it is at. We need to be careful. And I'll again double down on your wise advice.
[Amit Varma]: You know, get vaccinated, take precautions, wear a mask. You know, I love the way that,
[Amit Varma]: you know, in Southeast Asia, because of their past experience with, you know, pandemics
[Amit Varma]: and pandemic scares, it almost became a cultural thing that if you have any kind of respiratory
[Amit Varma]: disease, even if it's a flu, you wear a mask not to protect yourself, but out of concern
[Amit Varma]: for your fellow person, you know, and that's become part of the culture. And that's a beautiful
[Amit Varma]: thing. That is what a mask is. It is not meant to protect us as individuals, but to sort
[Amit Varma]: of in a sense, you know, assert our place in society that we have a responsibility for
[Amit Varma]: each other as well. And wearing a mask is part of that, but get vaccinated certainly.
[Amit Varma]: And one more thing, if I might add, kindly do hop over to your nearest bookstore online
[Amit Varma]: or offline and pick up Anirban's wonderful book. Anirban, thank you so much. I really
[Amit Varma]: love this conversation. So much I learned today.
[Guest]: Thank you so much for your kind words on the book and having this conversation with me.
[Guest]: It's been a few hours, but it's like time has flown by. And as you mentioned, I could
[Guest]: have kept speaking with you for a few hours more.
[Amit Varma]: Well, you know, someday we'll no doubt meet again.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, absolutely.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you.